# 2.11 Chapter Exercises

## Parenthesization

Given what we know about the precedence of , +, and ^, how can we parenthesize the following expressions more explicitly without changing their results? Put together answers you think are correct, then test them in the GHCi REPL.

For example, we want to make this more explicit:

~~2 + 2 * 3 - 3~~  
`2 + (2 * 3) - 3`

Attempt the above on the following expressions:
1.  
    ~~2 + 2 * 3 - 1~~  
    `2 + (2 * 3) - 1`

2.  
    ~~(^) 10 $ 1 + 1~~  
    `(^10) $ (1 + 1)`

3.  
~~2 ^ 2 * 4 ^ 5 + 1~~  
`(2 ^ 2)(4 ^ 5) + 1`

## Equivalent expressions
Which of the following pairs of expressions will return the same result when evaluated? Try to reason them out by reading the code, and then enter them into the REPL to check your work:

1.  
  > `1 + 1 === 2`

2. 
`10 ^ 2 === 10 + 9 * 10 `
   > **Note: '*' operator has higher precedence than '+'; '^' is right associative (infixr)**

3. 
`400 - 37 === (-) 37 400`
   > **Note: Never do (-10) 200 !**

4. 
`100 div 3 === 100 / 3`
   > **Note: Both 'div' and '/' are integral divisions**

5. 
`2 * 5 + 18 != 2 * (5 + 18)`
   > **Note: Parenthisation has highest precedence**

## More fun with functions
Here is a bit of code as it might be entered into a source file. Remember that when you write code in a source file, the order is unimportant, but when writing code directly into the REPL, the order does matter. Given that, look at this code, and rewrite it such that it could be evaluated in the REPL. Be sure to enter your code into the REPL to make sure it evaluates correctly:

```hs    
z = 7
x = y ^ 2
waxOn = x * 5
y = z + 8
```    

**Correct solution:**
```hs
z = 7
y = z + 8
x = y ^ 2
waxOn = x * 5
```

1. Now, you have a value called waxOn in your REPL. What do you think will happen if you enter:  
   ```hs
   10 + waxOn
   -- or
   (+10) waxOn
   ```
   > 1135  

   ```hs
   -- or
   (-) 15 waxOn
   ```
   > -1110

   ```hs
   -- or
   (-) waxOn 15
   ```
   > 1110  

2.  
Earlier, we looked at a function called triple. While your
REPL has waxOn in session, re-enter the triple function at
the prompt:  
triple x = x * 3  

3. Now, what will happen if we enter this at our GHCi prompt?
What do you think will happen first, considering what
role waxOn is playing in this function call? Then enter it,
see what does happen, and check your understanding:    
triple waxOn  
   > 3375  
   > The original value of waxOn will be substituted into this new triple function. 

4. Rewrite waxOn as an expression with a **where** clause in your source file. Load it into your REPL, and make sure it still works as expected.  
   ```hs
   waxOn = x * 5
      where x = y ^ 2
            y = z + 8
            z = 7
   ```

5. To the same source file where you have **waxOn**, add the **triple** function.  

   Remember: the function name should be at the left margin (that is, not nested as one of the **waxOn** expressions).  

   Make sure it works by loading it into your
   REPL and then entering triple waxOn again at the REPL prompt. You should have the same answer as you did above.

6. Now, without changing what you’ve done so far in that file, add a new function called **waxOff** that looks like this:  

   `waxOff x = triple x`  

7. Load the source file into your REPL, and enter **waxOff waxOn** at the prompt.  
You now have a function, **waxOff**, that can be applied to a variety of arguments—not just **waxOn** but any (numeric) value you want to substitute for **x**.  
Play with that a bit.  
What is the result of **waxOff 10** or **waxOff (-50)**?  
Try modifying your **waxOff** function to do something new—perhaps you want to first triple the x value and then square it or
divide it by 10.  
Spend some time getting comfortable with modifying the source file code, reloading it, and
checking your modifications in the REPL.  
   > *Main> waxOff 10  
   30  
   > *Main> waxOff (-50)  
   -150  
   > waxOff x = ((triple x)^2)/10  
   > *Main> waxOff 10  
   90.0  
