15.15 Chapter exercises
Semigroup exercises
Given a datatype, implement the Semigroup instance. Add
Semigroup constraints to type variables where needed. Use the
Semigroup class from base or write your own. When we use <>,
we mean the infix mappend operation from the Semigroup type
class.
Note We’re not always going to derive every instance you
may want or need in the datatypes we provide for exercises.
We expect you to know what you need and to take care of it
yourself by this point.
1. Validate all of your instances with QuickCheck. Since the
only law is associativity, that’s the only property you need
to reuse. Keep in mind that you’ll potentially need to
import the modules for Monoid and Semigroup and to avoid
naming conflicts for <>, depending on your version of
GHC:
data Trivial = Trivial deriving (Eq, Show)
CHAPTER 15. MONOID, SEMIGROUP 931
instance Semigroup Trivial where
_ <> _ = undefined
instance Arbitrary Trivial where
arbitrary = return Trivial
semigroupAssoc :: (Eq m, Semigroup m)
=> m -> m -> m -> Bool
semigroupAssoc a b c =
(a <> (b <> c)) == ((a <> b) <> c)
type TrivAssoc =
Trivial -> Trivial -> Trivial -> Bool
main :: IO ()
main =
quickCheck (semigroupAssoc :: TrivAssoc)
2. newtype Identity a = Identity a
3. data Two a b = Two a b
Hint: Ask for another Semigroup instance.
4. data Three a b c = Three a b c
5. data Four a b c d = Four a b c d
CHAPTER 15. MONOID, SEMIGROUP 932
6. newtype BoolConj =
BoolConj Bool
What it should do:
Prelude> (BoolConj True) <> (BoolConj True)
BoolConj True
Prelude> (BoolConj True) <> (BoolConj False)
BoolConj False
7. newtype BoolDisj =
BoolDisj Bool
What it should do:
Prelude> (BoolDisj True) <> (BoolDisj True)
BoolDisj True
Prelude> (BoolDisj True) <> (BoolDisj False)
BoolDisj True
8. data Or a b =
Fst a
| Snd b
The Semigroup for Or should have the following behavior.
We can think of it as having a “sticky” Snd value, whereby
CHAPTER 15. MONOID, SEMIGROUP 933
it’ll hold onto the first Snd value when and if one is passed
as an argument. This is similar to the First' Monoid you
wrote earlier:
Prelude> Fst 1 <> Snd 2
Snd 2
Prelude> Fst 1 <> Fst 2
Fst 2
Prelude> Snd 1 <> Fst 2
Snd 1
Prelude> Snd 1 <> Snd 2
Snd 1
9. newtype Combine a b =
Combine { unCombine :: (a -> b) }
What it should do:
Prelude> f = Combine $ \n -> Sum (n + 1)
Prelude> g = Combine $ \n -> Sum (n - 1)
Prelude> unCombine (f <> g) $ 0
Sum {getSum = 0}
Prelude> unCombine (f <> g) $ 1
Sum {getSum = 2}
Prelude> unCombine (f <> f) $ 1
Sum {getSum = 4}
CHAPTER 15. MONOID, SEMIGROUP 934
Prelude> unCombine (g <> f) $ 1
Sum {getSum = 2}
Hint: This function will eventually be applied to a single
value of type a. But you’ll have multiple functions that can
produce a value of type b. How do we combine multiple
values so we have a single b? This one will probably be
tricky! Remember that the type of the value inside of
Combine is that of a function. The type of functions should
already have an Arbitrary instance that you can reuse for
testing this instance.
10. newtype Comp a =
Comp { unComp :: (a -> a) }
Hint: We can do something that seems a little more specific and natural to functions now that the input and
output types are the same.
11. Look familiar?
data Validation a b =
Failure a | Success b
deriving (Eq, Show)
instance Semigroup a =>
Semigroup (Validation a b) where
(<>) = undefined
CHAPTER 15. MONOID, SEMIGROUP 935
Given this code:
main = do
let failure :: String
-> Validation String Int
failure = Failure
success :: Int
-> Validation String Int
success = Success
print $ success 1 <> failure "blah"
print $ failure "woot" <> failure "blah"
print $ success 1 <> success 2
print $ failure "woot" <> success 2
You should get this output:
Prelude> main
Success 1
Failure "wootblah"
Success 1
Success 2
Monoid exercises
Given a datatype, implement the Monoid instance. Add Monoid
constraints to type variables where needed. For the datatypes
CHAPTER 15. MONOID, SEMIGROUP 936
for which you’ve already implemented Semigroup instances, you
need to figure out what the identity value is.
1. Again, validate all of your instances with QuickCheck. Example scaffold is provided for the Trivial type:
data Trivial = Trivial deriving (Eq, Show)
instance Semigroup Trivial where
(<>) = undefined
instance Monoid Trivial where
mempty = undefined
mappend = (<>)
type TrivAssoc =
Trivial -> Trivial -> Trivial -> Bool
main :: IO ()
main = do
let sa = semigroupAssoc
mli = monoidLeftIdentity
mlr = monoidRightIdentity
quickCheck (sa :: TrivAssoc)
quickCheck (mli :: Trivial -> Bool)
quickCheck (mlr :: Trivial -> Bool)
CHAPTER 15. MONOID, SEMIGROUP 937
2. newtype Identity a =
Identity a deriving Show
3. data Two a b = Two a b deriving Show
4. newtype BoolConj =
BoolConj Bool
What it should do:
Prelude> (BoolConj True) `mappend` mempty
BoolConj True
Prelude> mempty `mappend` (BoolConj False)
BoolConj False
5. newtype BoolDisj =
BoolDisj Bool
What it should do:
Prelude> (BoolDisj True) `mappend` mempty
BoolDisj True
Prelude> mempty `mappend` (BoolDisj False)
BoolDisj False
6. newtype Combine a b =
Combine { unCombine :: (a -> b) }
CHAPTER 15. MONOID, SEMIGROUP 938
What it should do:
Prelude> f = Combine $ \n -> Sum (n + 1)
Prelude> unCombine (mappend f mempty) $ 1
Sum {getSum = 2}
7. Hint: We can do something that seems a little more specific and natural to functions now that the input and
output types are the same:
newtype Comp a =
Comp (a -> a)
8. This next exercise will involve doing something that will
still feel a bit unnatural, and you may find it difficult. If
you get it, and you haven’t done much FP or Haskell
before, get yourself a nice beverage. We’re going to toss
you the instance declaration, so you don’t churn on a
missing Monoid constraint you didn’t know you need:
newtype Mem s a =
Mem {
runMem :: s -> (a,s)
}
CHAPTER 15. MONOID, SEMIGROUP 939
instance Semigroup a => Semigroup (Mem s a) where
(<>) = undefined
instance Monoid a => Monoid (Mem s a) where
mempty = undefined
Given the following code:
f' = Mem $ \s -> ("hi", s + 1)
main = do
let rmzero = runMem mempty 0
rmleft = runMem (f' <> mempty) 0
rmright = runMem (mempty <> f') 0
print $ rmleft
print $ rmright
print $ (rmzero :: (String, Int))
print $ rmleft == runMem f' 0
print $ rmright == runMem f' 0
A correct Monoid for Mem should, given the above code,
produce the following output:
Prelude> main
("hi",1)
("hi",1)
CHAPTER 15. MONOID, SEMIGROUP 940
("",0)
True
True
Make certain your instance has output like the above, as
this is sanity checking the Monoid identity laws for you! It’s
not a proof, and it’s not even as good as property testing,
but it’ll catch the most common mistakes people make.
It’s not a trick, and you don’t need a Monoid for s. Yes,
such a Monoid can and does exist. Hint: chain the s values
from one function to the other. You’ll want to check the
identity laws, as a common first attempt will break them