# Chapter exercises

The first set of exercises here will mostly be review but will also introduce you to some new things. The second set is more conceptually challenging but does not use any syntax or concepts we haven’t already studied. If you get stuck, it may help to flip back to a relevant section and review.

## Data.Char
These first few exercises are straightforward but will introduce you to some new library functions and review some of what we’ve learned so far.  

Some of the functions we will use here are not standard in Prelude and so have to be imported from a module called `Data.Char`. You may do so in a source file (recommended) or at the Prelude prompt with the same phrase:  

> `import Data.Char` (write that at the top of your source file.)  

This brings into scope a bunch of new standard functions we can play with that operate on `Char` and `String` types.  

1. Query the types of `isUpper` and `toUpper`.  
    > isUpper :: Char -> Bool  
    > isLower :: Char -> Bool  

2. Given the following behaviors, which would we use to write a function that <ins>filters all the uppercase letters out of a String</ins>?  Write that function such that, given the input "HbEfLrLxO", your function will return "HELLO".
 
    Prelude Data.Char> isUpper 'J'  
    True  
    Prelude Data.Char> toUpper 'j'  
    'J'  

    ```hs
    import Data.Char
    filterUp :: String -> String  
    filterUp (x:xs) = filter isUpper (x:xs)
    ```

3. Write a function that will <ins>capitalize the first letter</ins> of a string and return the entire string. For example, if given the argument "julie", it will return "Julie".
    ```hs
    capFstLetter :: String -> String
    capFstLetter (x:xs) = toUpper x : xs
    ```

4. Now make a new version of that function that is **recursive**, such that if you give it the input "woot", it will holler back at you "WOOT". The type signature won’t change, but you will want to add a **base case**.
    ```hs
    capAll :: String -> String
    capAll [] = []
    capAll (x:xs) = toUpper x : capAll xs
    ```

5. To do the final exercise in this section, we’ll need another standard function for lists called `head`. Query the type of `head`, and experiment with it to see what it does. Now write a function that will capitalize the first letter of a String and return only that letter as the result.

    ```hs
    capLetter :: [Char] -> Char
    capLetter (n:ns) = toUpper $ head (n:ns)
    ```

6. Cool. Good work. Now rewrite it as a composed function.
Then, for fun, rewrite it point-free.  

    ```hs
    Composed function:
    capLetter' :: [Char] -> Char
    capLetter' (n:ns) = toUpper . head $ (n:ns)

    Point-free:
    capLetter'' :: [Char] -> Char
    capLetter'' = toUpper . head 
    ```

## Ciphers
We’ll still be using `Data.Char` for this next exercise. You should save these exercises in a module called *Cipher*, because we’ll be coming back to them in later chapters. You’ll be writing a Caesar cipher for now, but we’ll suggest some variations on the basic program in later chapters.

A Caesar cipher is a simple substitution cipher, in which <ins>each letter is replaced by the letter that is a fixed number of places down the alphabet from it</ins>.  

You will find variations on this all over the place—you can shift leftward or rightward, for any number of spaces. A rightward shift of three means that 'A' will become 'D', and 'B' will become 'E', for example. If you do a leftward shift of five, then 'a' would become 'v', and so forth.

Your goal in this exercise is to write a basic Caesar cipher
that **shifts rightward**. You can start by having the number of spaces to shift fixed, but it’s more challenging to write a cipher that allows you to vary the number of shifts so that you can encode your secret messages differently each time.

There are Caesar ciphers written in Haskell all over the internet, but to maximize the likelihood that you can write yours without peeking at those, we’ll provide a couple of tips. 

When yours is working the way you want it to, we would encourage you to then look around and compare your solution to others out there.

The first lines of your text file should look like this:  

```hs
module Cipher where
import Data.Char
```

`Data.Char` includes two functions called `ord` and `chr` that can be used to associate a `Char` with its `Int` representation in the Unicode system and vice versa:

```hs
*Cipher> :t chr  
chr :: Int -> Char  
*Cipher> :t ord  
ord :: Char -> Int  
```

Using these functions is optional; there are other ways you can proceed with shifting, but using `chr` and `ord` might simplify the process a bit.

You want your shift to wrap back around to the beginning of the alphabet, so that if you have a rightward shift of three from 'z', you end up back at 'c' and not somewhere in the vast Unicode hinterlands. 

Depending on how you’ve set things up, this might be a bit tricky. Consider starting from a base character (e.g., 'a') and using mod to ensure you’re only shifting over the 26 standard characters of the English alphabet.

You should include an unCaesar function that will decipher
your text, as well. In a later chapter, we will test it.

```hs
module Cipher where
import Data.Char


cipherNum :: Int -> Char -> Int
cipherNum n x = n + ord x
cipherChar :: Int -> Char -> Char
cipherChar x b = chr (cipherNum x b) 

wrapAround :: Int -> Char -> Char
wrapAround n x = chr ( (ord x + n) `mod` 122)

shiftRight :: Int -> Char -> Char
shiftRight n x
    | isUpper x = wrapAround (ord 'A') x
    | isLower x = wrapAround (ord 'a') x
    | otherwise = x

caeser :: String -> Int ->String
caeser s n = map (shiftRight n) s
 
unCaeser :: String -> Int ->String
unCaeser s n = caeser s (122 - n)

```

## Writing your own standard functions
Below are the outlines of some standard functions. The goal here is to write your own versions of these to gain a deeper understanding of recursion over lists and how to make functions flexible enough to accept a variety of inputs. You could figure out how to look up the answers, but you won’t do that, because you know you’d only be cheating yourself out of the
knowledge. Right?  

Let’s look at an example of what we’re after here. The **and** function takes a list of Bool values and returns True if and only if no values in the list are False. Here’s how you might write
your own version of it:  

```hs
-- direct recursion, not using (&&)  
myAnd :: [Bool] -> Bool  
myAnd [] = True  
myAnd (x:xs) =  
if x == False  
then False  
else myAnd xs  

-- direct recursion, using (&&)  
myAnd :: [Bool] -> Bool  
myAnd [] = True  
myAnd (x:xs) = x && myAnd xs  
```

And now the fun begins:  

1. myOr returns True if any Bool in the list is True:
myOr :: [Bool] -> Bool
myOr = undefined

```hs
-- direct recursion, not using (||)
myOr :: [Bool] -> Bool  
myOr [] = False  
myOr (x:xs) =  
    if x == True then True  
    else myOr xs

--direct recursion, using (||)
myOr :: [Bool] -> Bool
myOr [] = False
myOr (x:xs) = x || myOr xs
```

2. myAny returns True if a -> Bool applied to any of the values in the list returns True:  
myAny :: (a -> Bool) -> [a] -> Bool  
myAny = undefined  
Example for validating myAny:  
Prelude> myAny even [1, 3, 5]  
False  
Prelude> myAny odd [1, 3, 5]  
True  

```hs
myAny :: (a -> Bool) -> [a] -> Bool
myAny f [] = False
myAny f (x:xs) = f x || myAny f xs
```


3. After you write the recursive myElem, write another version that uses any. The built-in version of elem in GHC 7.10 and newer has a type that uses Foldable instead of the list type, specifically. You can ignore that and write the concrete version that works only for lists:  
myElem :: Eq a => a -> [a] -> Bool  
Prelude> myElem 1 [1..10]  
True  
Prelude> myElem 1 [2..10]  
False  

```hs
myElem :: Eq a => a -> [a] -> Bool
myElem _ [] = False
myElem b (x:xs) = b == x || myElem b xs


-- using any
myElem' :: Eq a => a -> [a] -> Bool
myElem' x xs = any (== x) xs
```

4. Implement myReverse:  
myReverse :: [a] -> [a]  
myReverse = undefined  
Prelude> myReverse "blah"  
"halb"  
Prelude> myReverse [1..5]  
[5,4,3,2,1]  

```hs
myReverse :: [a] -> [a]
myReverse (x:xs) = reverse (x:xs)
```

5. squish flattens a list of lists into a list:  
squish :: [[a]] -> [a]  
squish = undefined  

```hs
squish :: [[a]] -> [a]
squish [] = []
squish (y:ys) = y ++ squish ys
```

6. squishMap maps a function over a list and concatenates the results:  
squishMap :: (a -> [b]) -> [a] -> [b]  
squishMap = undefined  
Prelude> squishMap (\x -> [1, x, 3]) [2]  
[1,2,3]  
Prelude> squishMap (\x -> "WO "++[x]++" HOO ") "123"  
"WO 1 HOO WO 2 HOO WO 3 HOO "  

```hs
squishMap :: (a -> [b]) -> [a] -> [b] 
squishMap _ [] = []
squishMap f (x:xs) = f x ++ squishMap f xs 
```

7. squishAgain flattens a list of lists into a list. This time, reuse the squishMap function:  
squishAgain :: [[a]] -> [a]  
squishAgain = undefined  

```hs
squishAgain :: [[a]] -> [a]
squishAgain = squishMap id
```


8. myMaximumBy takes a comparison function and a list and
returns the greatest element of the list based on the last value that the comparison returns GT for. If you import maximumBy from Data.List, you’ll see that the type is:  

Foldable t => (a -> a -> Ordering)  
-> t a -> a  
Rather than:  
(a -> a -> Ordering) -> [a] -> a  

myMaximumBy :: (a -> a -> Ordering)  
-> [a] -> a  
myMaximumBy = undefined  
Prelude> xs = [1, 53, 9001, 10]  
Prelude> myMaximumBy compare xs  
9001  

```hs
myMaximumBy :: (a -> a -> Ordering) -> [a] -> a
myMaximumBy _ [] = error "myMaximumBy - empty list"
myMaximumBy _ [x] = x
myMaximumBy f (x1:x2:xs) =
    case f x1 x2 of
      GT -> myMaximumBy f (x1:xs)
      _  -> myMaximumBy f (x2:xs)
```

9. myMinimumBy takes a comparison function and a list and returns the least element of the list based on the last value that the comparison returns LT for:
  
myMinimumBy :: (a -> a -> Ordering)  
-> [a] -> a  
myMinimumBy = undefined  
Prelude> xs = [1, 53, 9001, 10]  
Prelude> myMinimumBy compare xs  
1  

```hs
myMinimumBy :: (a -> a -> Ordering) -> [a] -> a
myMinimumBy _ [] = error "myMaximumBy - empty list"
myMinimumBy _ [x] = x
myMinimumBy f (x1:x2:xs) =
    case f x1 x2 of
      LT -> myMinimumBy f (x1:xs)
      _  -> myMinimumBy f (x2:xs)
```

10. Using the myMinimumBy and myMaximumBy functions, write your own versions of maximum and minimum. If you have GHC 7.10 or newer, you’ll see a type constructor that wants a Foldable instance instead of a list, as has been the case for many functions so far:  
myMaximum :: (Ord a) => [a] -> a  
myMaximum = undefined  
myMinimum :: (Ord a) => [a] -> a  
myMinimum = undefined  

```hs
myMaximum :: (Ord a) => [a] -> a
myMaximum = myMaximumBy compare
 
myMinimum :: (Ord a) => [a] -> a
myMinimum = myMinimumBy compare
```
