14.7 Chapter exercises
Now it’s time to write some tests of your own. You could write
tests for most of the exercises you’ve done in the book, but
whether you’d want to use hspec or QuickCheck depends on what
you’re trying to test. We’ve tried to simplify things a bit by
telling you which to use for these exercises, but, as always, we
encourage you to experiment on your own.
CHAPTER 14. TESTING 861
Validating numbers into words
Remember the “numbers into words” exercise in Chapter 8?
You’ll be writing tests to validate the functions you wrote:
module WordNumberTest where
import Test.Hspec
import WordNumber
(digitToWord, digits, wordNumber)
main :: IO ()
main = hspec $ do
describe "digitToWord" $ do
it "returns zero for 0" $ do
digitToWord 0 `shouldBe` "zero"
it "returns one for 1" $ do
print "???"
describe "digits" $ do
it "returns [1] for 1" $ do
digits 1 `shouldBe` [1]
it "returns [1, 0, 0] for 100" $ do
print "???"
CHAPTER 14. TESTING 862
describe "wordNumber" $ do
it "one-zero-zero given 100" $ do
wordNumber 100
`shouldBe` "one-zero-zero"
it "nine-zero-zero-one for 9001" $ do
print "???"
Fill in the test cases that print question marks. If you think
of additional tests you could perform, add them.
Using QuickCheck
Test some basic properties using QuickCheck:
1. -- for a function
half x = x / 2
-- this property should hold
halfIdentity = (*2) . half
2. import Data.List (sort)
CHAPTER 14. TESTING 863
-- for any list you apply sort to,
-- this property should hold
listOrdered :: (Ord a) => [a] -> Bool
listOrdered xs =
snd $ foldr go (Nothing, True) xs
where go _ status@(_, False) = status
go y (Nothing, t) = (Just y, t)
go y (Just x, t) = (Just y, x >= y)
3. Now, we’ll test the associative and commutative properties
of addition:
plusAssociative x y z =
x + (y + z) == (x + y) + z
plusCommutative x y =
x + y == y + x
Keep in mind, these properties won’t hold for types based
on IEEE-754 floating point numbers, such as Float or
Double.
4. Now do the same for multiplication.
5. We mentioned in one of the first chapters that there are
some laws involving the relationships of quot to rem and
div to mod. Write QuickCheck tests to prove them:
CHAPTER 14. TESTING 864
-- quot rem
(quot x y) * y + (rem x y) == x
(div x y) * y + (mod x y) == x
6. Is the ^ operation associative? Is it commutative? Use
QuickCheck to see if the computer can contradict such an
assertion.
7. Test that reversing a list twice is the same as the identity
of the original list:
reverse . reverse == id
8. Write a property for the definition of $:
f $ a = f a
f . g = \x -> f (g x)
9. See if these two functions are equal:
foldr (:) == (++)
foldr (++) [] == concat
10. Hmm. Is that so?
f n xs = length (take n xs) == n
CHAPTER 14. TESTING 865
11. Finally, this is a fun one. You may remember we had you
compose read and show one time to complete a “round
trip.” Well, now you can test that it works:
f x = (read (show x)) == x
Failure
Find out why this property fails:
-- for a function
square x = x * x
-- Why does this property not hold?
-- Examine the type of sqrt.
squareIdentity = square . sqrt
Hint: Read about floating point arithmetic and precision if
you’re unfamiliar with it.
Idempotence
Idempotence refers to a property of some functions for which
the result value does not change beyond the initial application.
If you apply the function once, it returns a result, and applying
the same function to that value won’t ever change it. You might
think of a list that you sort: once you sort it, the sorted list
will remain the same after applying the same sorting function
CHAPTER 14. TESTING 866
to it again. It’s already sorted, so new applications of the sort
function won’t change it further.
Use QuickCheck and the following helper functions to demonstrate idempotence for the following:
twice f = f . f
fourTimes = twice . twice
1. f x =
(capitalizeWord x
== twice capitalizeWord x)
&&
(capitalizeWord x
== fourTimes capitalizeWord x)
2. f' x =
(sort x
== twice sort x)
&&
(sort x
== fourTimes sort x)
Make a Gen random generator for the datatype
We demonstrate in this chapter how to make Gen generators
for different datatypes. We are so certain you enjoyed that, we
are going to ask you to do it for some new datatypes:
CHAPTER 14. TESTING 867
1. Equal probabilities for each:
data Fool =
Fulse
| Frue
deriving (Eq, Show)
2. 2/3s chance of Fulse, 1/3 chance of Frue:
data Fool =
Fulse
| Frue
deriving (Eq, Show)
Hangman testing
Next, you should go back to the hangman project from the
previous chapter and write tests. The kinds of tests you can
write at this point will be limited due to the interactive nature
of the game. However, you can test the functions. Focus your
attention on testing the following:
fillInCharacter :: Puzzle -> Char -> Puzzle
fillInCharacter (Puzzle word
filledInSoFar s) c =
Puzzle word newFilledInSoFar (c : s)
CHAPTER 14. TESTING 868
where zipper guessed wordChar guessChar =
if wordChar == guessed
then Just wordChar
else guessChar
newFilledInSoFar =
let zd = (zipper c)
in zipWith zd word filledInSoFar
And:
handleGuess :: Puzzle -> Char -> IO Puzzle
handleGuess puzzle guess = do
putStrLn $ "Your guess was: " ++ [guess]
case (charInWord puzzle guess
, alreadyGuessed puzzle guess) of
(_, True) -> do
putStrLn "You already guessed that\
\ character, pick\
\ something else!"
return puzzle
CHAPTER 14. TESTING 869
(True, _) -> do
putStrLn "This character was in the\
\ word, filling in the\
\ word accordingly"
return (fillInCharacter puzzle guess)
(False, _) -> do
putStrLn "This character wasn't in\
\ the word, try again."
return (fillInCharacter puzzle guess)
Refresh your memory on what those are supposed to do,
and then test to make sure they do it.
Validating ciphers
As a final exercise, create QuickCheck properties that verify that
your Caesar and Vigenère ciphers return the same data after
encoding and decoding a string.