# 4.9 Chapter exercises
 As in previous chapters, you will gain more by working out the answers to the following exercises before using GHCi, but be sure to use your REPL to check them. Also, you will need to have the **awesome**, **also**, and **allAwesome** code from above in scope for this REPL session. For your convenience, here are those values again:


```hs
awesome = ["Papuchon", "curry", ":)"]   
also = ["Quake", "The Simons"]   
allAwesome = [awesome, also]
```

> length is a function that takes a list and returns the number of items in that list.


1. Given the definition of length above, what would its type
signature be? How many arguments does it take and of
what types? What is the type of the result it evaluates to?
    >  Type signature:  
    length :: Foldable t => t a -> Int  
    > It takes 2 arguments(list and number of items of types (Foldable t, a))  
    > The type of the result it evaluates to: Int

2. What are the results of the following expressions?  

    a) length [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]  
    `5`

    b) length [(1, 2), (2, 3), (3, 4)]  
    `3`  

    c) length allAwesome  
    `Variable not in scope: allAwesome :: t0 a0`
    > Because allAwesome is not defined.

    d) length (concat allAwesome)  
    `Variable not in scope: allAwesome :: t0 a0`
    > Because allAwesome is not defined and concat only has one argument.

 3. Given what we know about numeric types and the type signature of length, look at the two expressions below. One works, and one returns an error.  
 Determine which will return an error and why (n.b., you will find that Foldable t => t a represents [a], as with concat in the previous chapter. Again, consider Foldable t to represent a list here, even though list is only one of the possible types of t):  
    `Correct: 6 / 3`  
    `Error: 6 / length [1, 2, 3]`
    > Reason: Operator '/' cannot be used to divide length[1, 2, 3]

4. How can you fix the broken code from the preceding
exercise using a different division function/operator?  
    ```hs 
    div 6 (length[1,2,3])

    Alternatively: 
    quot 6 (length[1,2,3])
    ```

5. What is the type of the expression 2 + 3 == 5? What would
we expect as a result?
    > Type: Bool => Int -> Int  
    > Result: True  


6. What is the type and expected result value of the following:  

    a) x = 5  
    > Type:  
    x :: Num p => p  
    Expected value: `5`

    b) x + 3 == 5  
    > Type:  
      x :: Num p => p  
    Expected value: `False`  

7. Below are some bits of code. Which will work? Why or why not? If they will work, what values would these
reduce to?

      a) length allAwesome == 2
    > Will not work because you need to define variable allAwesome.

      b) length [1, 'a', 3, 'b']  
    > Will not work because the list contains different types.  

      c) length allAwesome + length awesome
    > Will not work because "+" operator only adds Int types.

      d) (8 == 8) && ('b' < 'a')
    > Expected value: False  
    > Reason: Because ('a' < 'b').

      e) (8 == 8) && 9
    > Will not work because 9 is not a valid expression.


8. Write a function that tells you whether or not a given String (or list) is a palindrome. Here, you’ll want to use a function called reverse, a predefined function that does what it sounds like:

    > reverse :: [a] -> [a]
    reverse "blah"   
    "halb"

    ```hs
    isPalindrome :: (Eq a) => [a] -> Bool  
    isPalindrome xs = xs == (reverse xs)
    ```


9. Write a function to return the absolute value of a number using an if-then-else expression:  

    ```hs
    myAbs :: Integer -> Integer  
      myAbs n =
        if n == 0
          then 0
        else
          abs n
    ```

10. Fill in the definition of the following function, using fst and snd:
    ```hs 
    f :: (a, b) -> (c, d) -> ((b, d), (a, c))  
    f x y = ((snd x, snd y), (fst x, fst y))
    ```

## Correcting syntax
In the following examples, you’ll be shown syntactically incorrect code. Type it in, and try to correct it in your text editor, validating it with GHC or GHCi.

1. Here, we want a function that **adds 1 to the length of a
string argument and returns that result:**  
    x = (+)  
    F xs = w 'x' 1  
    where w = length xs
      
    ``` hs
        x = (+)    
      addOne :: [Char] -> Integer  

      addOne xs = w x 1
        where w :: Integer
              w = length xs 
    ```

2. This is supposed to be the identity function, id:  
    ``` 
    \x -> x
    ```
    > eg, id 5 =  
    > Output: 5

3. When fixed, this function will return 1 from the value (1,
2):  
f (a b) = A  
    > `fst (a b)`


Match the function names to their types

1. Which of the following types is the type of **show**?  
~~a) show a => a -> String~~  
~~b) Show a -> a -> String~~   
**c) Show a => a -> String**

2. Which of the following types is the type of **==**?  
~~a) a -> a -> Bool~~  
**b) Eq a => a -> a -> Bool**  
~~c) Eq a -> a -> a -> Bool~~  
~~d) Eq a => A -> Bool~~

3. Which of the following types is the type of **fst**?  
**a) (a, b) -> a**  
~~b) b -> a~~  
~~c) (a, b) -> b~~  

4. Which of the following types is the type of **+**?  
~~a) Num a -> a -> a -> Bool~~  
~~b) Num a => a -> a -> Bool~~  
~~c) num a => a -> a -> a~~  
**d) Num a => a -> a -> a**  
~~e) a -> a -> a~~  
