# Chapter exercises

<ins>Multiple choice</ins>  
1. The Eq class  
~~a) includes all types in Haskell.~~  
~~b) is the same as the Ord class.~~  
**c) makes equality tests possible.**  
~~d) only includes numeric types.~~ 

2. The type class Ord  
~~a) allows any two values to be compared.~~  
**b) is a subclass of Eq.**  
~~c) is a superclass of Eq.~~  
~~d) has no instance for Bool.~~  
> superclass: the class which is <ins>inherited from</ins>  
> subclass: the class which <ins>inherits</ins>

3. Suppose the type class Ord has an operator '>'. What is the
type of '>'?  
**a) Ord a => a -> a -> Bool**  
~~b) Ord a => Int -> Bool~~  
~~c) Ord a => a -> Char~~  
~~d) Ord a => Char -> [Char]~~  

4. In: 
        
        x = divMod 16 12

    ~~a) the type of x is Integer.~~  
    ~~b) the value of x is undecidable.~~  
    **c) the type of x is a tuple.**  
    ~~d) x is equal to 12 / 16.~~  

5. The type class **Integral** includes  
**a) Int and Integer numbers.**  
~~b) integral, real, and fractional numbers.~~  
~~c) Schrodinger’s cat.~~  
~~d) only positive numbers.~~  

## Does it type check? 
For this section of exercises, you’ll be practicing looking for <ins> type and type class errors. </ins>  
For example, **printIt** will not work, because functions like 'x' have no instance of Show, the type class that lets you convert things to String (usually for printing):  

```hs
x :: Int -> Int  
x blah = blah + 20 

printIt :: IO ()  
printIt = putStrLn (show x)  
```

Here’s the type error you get if you try to load the code:
• No instance for (Show (Int -> Int)) arising from a use of ‘show’ (maybe you haven't applied a function to enough arguments?)
• In the first argument of ‘putStrLn’,
namely ‘(show x)’
In the expression: putStrLn (show x)
In an equation for ‘printIt’:
printIt = putStrLn (show x)

It’s saying that it can’t find an implementation of the type
class Show for the type Int -> Int, which makes sense. Nothing with the function type constructor, ->, has an instance of Show by default in Haskell.6

#### Examine the following code, and decide whether it will type check. Then load it in GHCi, and see if you were correct. If it doesn’t type check, try to match the type error against your understanding of why it didn’t work. If you can, fix the error and re-run the code.

1. Does the following code type check? If not, why not?  
```hs
data Person = Person Bool
printPerson :: Person -> IO ()
printPerson person = putStrLn (show person)  
```
> No, it doesn't type check.  
> Reason: It can't find an implementation of the type class **Show** for the type **Int -> Int**. Nothing with the function type constructor, '->', has an instance of **Show** by default in Haskell.

```hs 
> Correct solution:
data Person = Person Bool 
instance Show Person where
    show (Person b) = show b

printPerson :: Person -> IO()
printPerson person = putStrLn (show person)
```

2. Does the following type check? If not, why not?  

```hs
data Mood = Blah
          | Woot deriving Show
settleDown x = if x == Woot
               then Blah
               else x
```
> It doesn't type check.  
> Reason: No instance for (Eq Mood).  

```hs 
> Correct solution:
data Mood = Blah | Woot deriving Show

instance Eq Mood where
    (==) (x) (Woot) = True
    (==) (x) _ = False

settleDown :: Mood -> Mood
settleDown x = if x == Woot
                then Blah
                else x
```
3. If you were able to get settleDown to type check:  
    a) What values are acceptable inputs to that function?  
    > Acceptable inputs: Blah, Woot

    b) What will happen if you try to run settleDown 9? Why?
    > Error:  No instance for (Num Mood) arising from the literal `9'  
    > Reason: Because no instance for Num typeclass defined in Mood datatype.

    c) What will happen if you try to run Blah > Woot? Why?
    > Error: No instance for (Ord Mood) arising from a use of `>'  
    > Reason: Because no Ord instance was defined.

4. Does the following type check? If not, why not?
```hs  
type Subject = String  
type Verb = String  
type Object = String  
data Sentence =  
Sentence Subject Verb Object  
deriving (Eq, Show)  
s1 = Sentence "dogs" "drool"  
s2 = Sentence "Julie" "loves" "dogs"  
```
> No, it doesn't type check.  
> Reason: Incorrect indentation and s1 is missing a third argument, wrt to the defined datatype.

```hs
Correct solution:
type Subject = String
type Verb = String
type Object = String

data Sentence = Sentence Subject Verb Object deriving (Eq, Show)

s1 = Sentence "dogs" "drool" "on carpet" 
s2 = Sentence "Julie" "loves" "dogs"
```

Given a datatype declaration, what can we do?  
Given the following datatype definitions: 

```hs
data Rocks =  
Rocks String deriving (Eq, Show)  
data Yeah =  
Yeah Bool deriving (Eq, Show)  
data Papu =  
Papu Rocks Yeah  
deriving (Eq, Show)  
```

Which of the following will type check? For the ones that don’t type check, why don’t they?  

1. phew = Papu "chases" True
> It doesn't type check.

```hs
> Correct solution:
data Rocks = Rocks String deriving (Eq, Show)  
data Yeah = Yeah Bool deriving (Eq, Show)  
data Papu = Papu Rocks Yeah deriving (Eq, Show)
phew = Papu (Rocks "chases") (Yeah True)
```
> Reason: Need to match the input to the datatypes format.  


2. truth = Papu (Rocks "chomskydoz")(Yeah True)
> Yes, it type checks.

3. equalityForall :: Papu -> Papu -> Bool  
equalityForall p p' = p == p'
> Yes, it type checks.

\
4. comparePapus :: Papu -> Papu -> Bool  
comparePapus p p' = p > p'
```hs
data Rocks = Rocks String deriving (Eq, Show)  
data Yeah = Yeah Bool deriving (Eq, Show)  
data Papu = Papu Rocks Yeah deriving (Eq, Show)

comparePapus :: Papu -> Papu -> Bool
comparePapus p p' = p > p' deriving (Ord, Show)

instance Ord comparePapus where
    compare p p' = GT
    compare _ _ = LT
```


## Match the types  
We’re going to give you two types and their implementations.
Then we’re going to ask you if you can substitute the second
type for the first. You can test this by typing the first declaration and its type into a file and editing in the new one, loading to see if it fails. Don’t guess—test all your answers!

1. For the following definition:  
a) i :: Num a => a  
i = 1  
b) Try replacing the type signature with the following:  
i :: a  
After you’ve formulated your own answer, test that
answer. Use GHCi to check what type GHC infers for the definitions we provide without a type assigned.  
For this exercise, you’d type in:  
Prelude> `i = 1`  
Prelude> :t i  
-- Result intentionally elided

2. a) `f :: Float`  
`f = 1.0`  
b) `f :: Num a => a`  
> No, it can't be substituted.  
> Could not deduce (Fractional a) arising from the literal `1.0'.  
> Note: Cannot generalize a typeclass once specified.

3. a) `f :: Float`  
`f = 1.0`  
b) `f :: Fractional a => a`  
> Yes, it can be substituted.

4. Hint for the following:  
type **:info RealFrac** in your REPL:  
a) `f :: Float`  
`f = 1.0`  
b) `f :: RealFrac a => a`  
> Yes, it can be substituted.  

5. a) `freud :: a -> a`  
`freud x = x`  
b) `freud :: Ord a => a -> a`  
> Yes, it can be substituted.

6. a) `freud' :: a -> a`  
`freud' x = x`  
b) `freud' :: Int -> Int`  
> Yes, it can be substituted.

7. a) `myX = 1 :: Int`  
`sigmund :: Int -> Int`  
`sigmund x = myX`  
b) `sigmund :: a -> a`  
> No, it can't be substituted.  
> Reason: Can't match expected type 'a' with Int.    

8. a) `myX = 1 :: Int`  
`sigmund' :: Int -> Int`  
`sigmund' x = myX`  
b) `sigmund' :: Num a => a -> a`  
> No, it can't be substituted.  
> Reason: Can't match expected type Num with Int.  

9. a) You’ll need to import sort from Data.List:  
`jung :: Ord a => [a] -> a`  
`jung xs = head (sort xs)` 

b) `jung :: [Int] -> Int`  
> Yes, it can be substituted.  

10. a) `young :: [Char] -> Char`  
`young xs = head (sort xs)`  
b) `young :: Ord a => [a] -> a`  
> Yes, it can be substituted.

11. a) `mySort :: [Char] -> [Char]`  
`mySort = sort`  
`signifier :: [Char] -> Char`  
`signifier xs = head (mySort xs)`  
b) `signifier :: Ord a => [a] -> a`  
> No, it can't be substituted.  
> Reason: Couldn't match expected type 'a' with Char.

## Type-Kwon-Do Two: Electric typealoo  
Round two! Same rules apply—you’re trying to fill in terms
(code) which will fit the types. The idea with these exercises is that you’ll derive the implementations from the type information. You’ll probably need to use stuff from Prelude:  
1. 
```hs
chk :: Eq b => (a -> b) -> a -> b -> Bool  
chk f x y = f x == y
```
2. Hint: use some arithmetic operation to combine values
of type b. Pick one:  
arith :: Num b  
=> (a -> b)  
-> Integer  
-> a  
-> b  
```hs
arith :: Num b => (a -> b) -> Integer -> a -> b  
arith f x y = fromInteger x * f y
``` 
