# Chapter exercises
Determine the kinds:  
1. Given:  
id :: a -> a  
What is the kind of a?  
> The kind of a is *.  

2. r :: a -> f a  
What are the kinds of a and f?  
> The kind of a is * and the kind of type f is * -> *.

## String processing
Because this is the kind of thing linguists ahem enjoy doing in their spare time.  

1. Write a recursive function named replaceThe that takes
a text/string, breaks it into words, and replaces each instance of "the" with "a". It should only replace exactly
the word "the". notThe is a suggested helper function for
accomplishing this:  

notThe :: String -> Maybe String  
notThe = undefined  
Example GHCi session using the above functions:  
Prelude> notThe "the"  
Nothing  
Prelude> notThe "blahtheblah"  
Just "blahtheblah"  
Prelude> notThe "woot"  
Just "woot"  
replaceThe :: String -> String  
replaceThe = undefined  
Prelude> replaceThe "the cow loves us"  
"a cow loves us"  

```hs
notThe :: String -> Maybe String
notThe s = if (map toLower s) == "the"
           then Nothing
           else Just s
replaceThe :: String -> String
replaceThe = unwords .  map (nothingTo "a" . notThe) . words
 
nothingTo :: a -> Maybe a -> a
nothingTo x Nothing  = x
nothingTo _ (Just y) = y
```

2. Write a recursive function that takes a text/string, breaks it into words, and counts the number of instances of "the" followed by a vowel-initial word:  

countTheBeforeVowel :: String -> Integer  
countTheBeforeVowel = undefined  
Prelude> countTheBeforeVowel "the cow"  
0  

Prelude> countTheBeforeVowel "the evil cow"  
1  

```hs
countTheBeforeVowel :: String -> Integer
countTheBeforeVowel  = go . words
    where go []               = 0
          go ("the":(x:_):xs) = if isVowel x then 1 else 0 + go xs
          go (_:xs)           = go xs
 
 
isVowel :: Char -> Bool
isVowel c = toLower c `elem` "aeiou"
```

3. Return the number of letters that are vowels in a word.
Hint: it’s helpful to break this into steps. Add any helper
functions necessary to achieve your objectives:  
a) Test for vowel-hood.  
b) Return the vowels of a string.  
c) Count the number of elements returned.  
countVowels :: String -> Integer  
countVowels = undefined  
Prelude> countVowels "the cow"  
2  
Prelude> countVowels "Mikolajczak"  
4  

```hs
countVowels :: String -> Integer
countVowels = toInteger . length . filter isVowel
```

## Validate the word
Use the Maybe type to write a function that counts the number of vowels in a string and the number of consonants.  

If the number of vowels exceeds the number of consonants, the function returns Nothing. In many human languages, vowels rarely exceed the number of consonants, so when they do, it may indicate the input isn’t a word (that is, a valid input to your dataset):  
newtype Word' =  
Word' String  
deriving (Eq, Show)  
vowels = "aeiou"  
mkWord :: String -> Maybe Word'  
mkWord = undefined  

```hs
mkWord :: String -> Maybe Word'
mkWord s = if numVowels > numConsonants
           then Nothing
           else Just $ Word' s
    where  numVowels = length $ filter isVowel s
           numConsonants = length s - numVowels
```

## It’s only natural
You’ll be presented with a datatype to represent the natural
numbers.  

The only values representable with the naturals
are whole numbers from zero to infinity.  

Your task will be to implement functions to convert natural numbers to integers and integers to naturals. The conversion from Nat to Integer won’t return Maybe, because—as you know—Integer is a strict superset of Nat.  

Any Nat can be represented by an Integer, but
the same is not true of any Integer. Negative numbers are not valid natural numbers:  

-- As natural as any  
-- competitive bodybuilder  
data Nat =  
Zero  
| Succ Nat  
deriving (Eq, Show)  
natToInteger :: Nat -> Integer  
natToInteger = undefined  
integerToNat :: Integer -> Maybe Nat  
integerToNat = undefined  
Prelude> natToInteger Zero  
0  
Prelude> natToInteger (Succ Zero)  
1  
Prelude> natToInteger (Succ (Succ Zero))  
2  
Prelude> integerToNat 0  
Just Zero  
Prelude> integerToNat 1  
Just (Succ Zero)  
Prelude> integerToNat 2  
Just (Succ (Succ Zero))  
Prelude> integerToNat (-1)  
Nothing  

```hs
natToInteger :: Nat -> Integer
natToInteger Zero     = 0
natToInteger (Succ x) = 1 + natToInteger x
 
integerToNat :: Integer -> Maybe Nat
integerToNat n | n  Nat
safeNat 0 = Zero
safeNat n = Succ $ safeNat (n - 1)
```

## Small library for Maybe
Write the following functions. This may take some time.  
1. Simple Boolean checks for Maybe values:  
isJust :: Maybe a -> Bool  
isNothing :: Maybe a -> Bool  
Prelude> isJust (Just 1)  
True  
Prelude> isJust Nothing  
False  
Prelude> isNothing (Just 1)  
False  
Prelude> isNothing Nothing  
True  

```hs
isJust :: Maybe a -> Bool
isJust Nothing = False
isJust _       = True
 
isNothing :: Maybe a -> Bool
isNothing = not . isJust
```

2. The following is the Maybe catamorphism. You can turn a
Maybe value into anything else with this:  
mayybee :: b -> (a -> b) -> Maybe a -> b  
Prelude> mayybee 0 (+1) Nothing  
0  
Prelude> mayybee 0 (+1) (Just 1)  
2  

```hs
mayybee :: b -> (a -> b) -> Maybe a -> b
mayybee b _ Nothing  = b
mayybee _ f (Just a) = f a
```

3. In case you just want to provide a fallback value. Try
writing it in terms of the maybe catamorphism:  
fromMaybe :: a -> Maybe a -> a  
Prelude> fromMaybe 0 Nothing  
0  
Prelude> fromMaybe 0 (Just 1)  
1  

```hs
fromMaybe :: a -> Maybe a -> a
fromMaybe a = mayybee a id
```

4. Converting between List and Maybe:  
listToMaybe :: [a] -> Maybe a  
maybeToList :: Maybe a -> [a]  
Prelude> listToMaybe [1, 2, 3]  
Just 1  
Prelude> listToMaybe []  
Nothing  
Prelude> maybeToList (Just 1)  
[1]  
Prelude> maybeToList Nothing  
[]  

```hs
listToMaybe :: [a] -> Maybe a
listToMaybe []    = Nothing
listToMaybe (a:_) = Just a
 
maybeToList :: Maybe a -> [a]
maybeToList Nothing  = []
maybeToList (Just a) = [a]
```

5. For when we want to drop the Nothing values from a list:  
catMaybes :: [Maybe a] -> [a]  
Prelude> catMaybes [Just 1, Nothing, Just 2]  
[1, 2]  
Prelude> let xs = take 3 $ repeat Nothing  
Prelude> catMaybes xs  
[]  

```hs
catMaybes :: [Maybe a] -> [a]
catMaybes = foldr go []
    where go Nothing as  = as
          go (Just a) as = a:as
```

6. You’ll see this called sequence later:  
flipMaybe :: [Maybe a] -> Maybe [a]  
Prelude> flipMaybe [Just 1, Just 2, Just 3]  
Just [1, 2, 3]  
Prelude> flipMaybe [Just 1, Nothing, Just 3]  
Nothing  

```hs
flipMaybe :: [Maybe a] -> Maybe [a]
flipMaybe = foldr go (Just [])
    where go Nothing _              = Nothing
          go _ Nothing              = Nothing
          go (Just a) (Just result) = Just (a:result)
```

## Small library for Either
Write each of the following functions. If more than one possible unique function exists for the type, use common sense to determine what it should do.  

1. Try to eventually arrive at a solution that uses foldr, even if earlier versions don’t use foldr:  

lefts' :: [Either a b] -> [a]  

```hs
lefts' :: [Either a b] -> [a]
lefts' = foldr go []
    where go (Left x) xs = x:xs
          go _        xs = xs
```

2. Same as the last one. Use foldr, eventually:  
rights' :: [Either a b] -> [b]  

```hs
rights' :: [Either a b] -> [b]
rights' = foldr go []
    where go (Right x) xs = x:xs
          go _         xs = xs
```

3. partitionEithers' :: [Either a b]  
-> ([a], [b])  

```hs
partitionEithers' :: [Either a b] -> ([a], [b])
partitionEithers' = foldr go ([], [])
    where go (Left  l) (ls, rs) = (l:ls,   rs)
          go (Right r) (ls, rs) = (ls  , r:rs)
```

4. eitherMaybe' :: (b -> c)  
-> Either a b  
-> Maybe c  

```hs
eitherMaybe' :: (b -> c) -> Either a b -> Maybe c
eitherMaybe' _ (Left  _) = Nothing
eitherMaybe' f (Right b) = Just (f b)
```

5. This is a general catamorphism for Either values:  
either' :: (a -> c)  
-> (b -> c)  
-> Either a b  
-> c  

```hs
either' :: (a -> c) -> (b -> c) -> Either a b -> c
either' f _ (Left  a) = f a
either' _ f (Right b) = f b
```

6. Same as before, but use the either' function you just
wrote:  
eitherMaybe'' :: (b -> c)  
-> Either a b  
-> Maybe c  

Most of the functions you just saw are in the Prelude, Data.Maybe, or Data.Either, but you should strive to write them yourself without looking at existing implementations. You will deprive yourself if you cheat.  

```hs
eitherMaybe'' :: (b -> c) -> Either a b -> Maybe c
eitherMaybe'' f = either' (const Nothing) (Just . f)
```

## Unfolds
While the idea of catamorphisms is still relatively fresh in our minds, let’s turn our attention to their dual: anamorphisms.  

If folds, or catamorphisms, let us break data structures down, then unfolds let us build them up. There are, as with folds, a few different ways to unfold a data structure. We can use them to create finite and infinite data structures alike.

iterate is like a limited unfold that never ends:  
Prelude> :t iterate  
iterate :: (a -> a) -> a -> [a]  

iterate never ends, so we must use take to get a finite list:  
Prelude> take 10 $ iterate (+1) 0  
[0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9]  

unfoldr is more general than iterate:  
Prelude> :t unfoldr  
unfoldr :: (b -> Maybe (a, b)) -> b -> [a]  
Here’s how to use unfoldr to do what iterate does:  

Prelude> f b = Just (b, b + 1)  
Prelude> take 10 $ unfoldr f 0  
[0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9]  

Why bother?  
We bother with this for the same reason we abstract direct
recursion into folds, such as with sum, product, and concat:  

import Data.List  
mehSum :: Num a => [a] -> a  
mehSum xs = go 0 xs  
where go :: Num a => a -> [a] -> a  
go n [] = n  
go n (x:xs) = (go (n + x) xs)  
niceSum :: Num a => [a] -> a  
niceSum = foldl' (+) 0  
mehProduct :: Num a => [a] -> a  
mehProduct xs = go 1 xs  
where go :: Num a => a -> [a] -> a  
go n [] = n  
go n (x:xs) = (go (n * x) xs)  
niceProduct :: Num a => [a] -> a  
niceProduct = foldl' (*) 1  

Remember the redundant structure when we looked at
folds?  
mehConcat :: [[a]] -> [a]  
mehConcat xs = go [] xs  
where go :: [a] -> [[a]] -> [a]  
go xs' [] = xs'  
go xs' (x:xs) = (go (xs' ++ x) xs)  
niceConcat :: [[a]] -> [a]  
niceConcat = foldr (++) []  

This may give you a mild headache, but you may also see
that this same principle of abstracting out common patterns
and giving them names applies as well to unfolds as it does to folds.  

## Write your own iterate and unfoldr  
1. Write the function myIterate using direct recursion.   Compare the behavior with the built-in iterate to gauge correctness. Do not look at the source or any examples of
iterate, so that you are forced to do this yourself:  

myIterate :: (a -> a) -> a -> [a]  
myIterate = undefined  

```hs
myIterate :: (a -> a) -> a -> [a]
myIterate f x = x : myIterate f (f x)
```

2. Write the function myUnfoldr using direct recursion.  Compare with the built-in unfoldr to check your implementation. Again, don’t look at implementations of unfoldr, so that you figure it out yourself:  

myUnfoldr :: (b -> Maybe (a, b))  
-> b  
-> [a]  
myUnfoldr = undefined  

```hs
myUnfoldr :: (b -> Maybe (a, b)) -> b -> [a]
myUnfoldr f next = case f next of
                     Nothing     -> []
                     Just (a, b) -> a : myUnfoldr f b
```

3. Rewrite myIterate into betterIterate using myUnfoldr. A
hint—we use unfoldr to produce the same results as iterate
above. Do this with different functions, and see if you can
abstract the structure out.  
It helps to have the types in front of you:  
myUnfoldr :: (b -> Maybe (a, b))  
-> b  
-> [a]  
betterIterate :: (a -> a) -> a -> [a]  
betterIterate f x = myUnfoldr ...?  
Remember, your betterIterate should have the same results as iterate:  
Prelude> take 10 $ iterate (+1) 0  

[0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9]  
Prelude> take 10 $ betterIterate (+1) 0  
[0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9]  

```hs
betterIterate :: (a -> a) -> a -> [a]
betterIterate f = myUnfoldr go
    where go a = Just (a, f a)
```

## Finally something other than a list!  
Given the BinaryTree from the last chapter, complete the following exercises. Here’s that datatype again:  
data BinaryTree a =  
Leaf  
| Node (BinaryTree a) a (BinaryTree a)  
deriving (Eq, Ord, Show)  

1. Write unfold for BinaryTree:  
unfold :: (a -> Maybe (a,b,a))  
-> a  
-> BinaryTree b  
unfold = undefined  

```hs
unfold :: (a -> Maybe (a,b,a)) -> a -> BinaryTree b
unfold f a =
    case f a of
      Nothing           -> Leaf
      Just (la,  b, ra) -> Node (unfold f la) b (unfold f ra)
```

2. Make a tree builder.  
Using the unfold function you made for BinaryTree, write
the following function:  
treeBuild :: Integer -> BinaryTree Integer  
treeBuild n = undefined  

You should be producing results that look like the following:  
Prelude> treeBuild 0  
Leaf  
Prelude> treeBuild 1  
Node Leaf 0 Leaf  
Prelude> treeBuild 2  
Node (Node Leaf 1 Leaf)  
0  
(Node Leaf 1 Leaf)  
Prelude> treeBuild 3  
Node (Node (Node Leaf 2 Leaf)  
1  
(Node Leaf 2 Leaf))  
0  
(Node (Node Leaf 2 Leaf)  
1  
(Node Leaf 2 Leaf))  
Or in a slightly different representation:  
0  

```hs
0  
/ \  
1 1

 0  
/  \  
1   1  
/\  /\  
2 2 2 2
Good work.
```

```hs
treeBuild :: Integer -> BinaryTree Integer
treeBuild n = unfold go 0
    where go d | d == n = Nothing
               | otherwise = Just (d+1, d ,d+1)
```