# Exercises: Lookups
In the following exercises, you will need to use the given terms
to make the expressions type check:
1. pure
2. (<$>) -- or fmap
3. (<*>)

Make the following expressions type check:

1. added :: Maybe Integer  
added =  
(+3) <$> (lookup 3 zip [1, 2, 3] [4, 5, 6]) 

    Answer:
    ```hs
    added :: Maybe Integer  
    added =  
    (+3) <$> (lookup 3 $ zip [1, 2, 3] [4, 5, 6])
    ```

2. y :: Maybe Integer  
y = lookup 3 $ zip [1, 2, 3] [4, 5, 6]  
z :: Maybe Integer  
z = lookup 2 $ zip [1, 2, 3] [4, 5, 6]  
tupled :: Maybe (Integer, Integer)  
tupled = (,) y z  

    Answer:
    ```hs
    y :: Maybe Integer  
    y = lookup 3 $ zip [1, 2, 3] [4, 5, 6]  
    z :: Maybe Integer  
    z = lookup 2 $ zip [1, 2, 3] [4, 5, 6]  
    tupled :: Maybe (Integer, Integer)  
    tupled = (,) <$> y <*> z
    ```


3. import Data.List (elemIndex)  
x :: Maybe Int  
x = elemIndex 3 [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]  
y :: Maybe Int  
y = elemIndex 4 [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]  
max' :: Int -> Int -> Int  
max' = max  
maxed :: Maybe Int  
maxed = max' x y  
    
    Answer:
    ```hs
    import Data.List (elemIndex)  
    x :: Maybe Int  
    x = elemIndex 3 [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]  
    y :: Maybe Int  
    y = elemIndex 4 [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]  
    max' :: Int -> Int -> Int  
    max' = max  
    maxed :: Maybe Int  
    maxed = max' <$> x <*> y
    ```


4. xs = [1, 2, 3]  
ys = [4, 5, 6]  
x :: Maybe Integer  
x = lookup 3 $ zip xs ys  
y :: Maybe Integer  
y = lookup 2 $ zip xs ys  
summed :: Maybe Integer  
summed = sum $ (,) x y  

    Answer:
    ```hs
    xs = [1, 2, 3]  
    ys = [4, 5, 6]  
    x :: Maybe Integer  
    x = lookup 3 $ zip xs ys  
    y :: Maybe Integer  
    y = lookup 2 $ zip xs ys  
    summed :: Maybe Integer  
    summed = fmap sum $ (,) <$> x <*> y 
    ```

# Exercise: Identity instance
Write an Applicative instance for Identity: 

newtype Identity a = Identity a  
    deriving (Eq, Ord, Show)  

instance Functor Identity where
    fmap f (Identity x) = Identity (f x)
    fmap = undefined  

instance Applicative Identity where
    pure = Identity
    pure = undefined

    <*> :: f (a->b) -> f a -> f b
    Identity f <*> Identity y = Identity (f y)

# Exercise: Constant instance
Write an Applicative instance for Constant:  

newtype Constant a b =  
    Constant { getConstant :: a }
    deriving (Eq, Ord, Show)

instance Functor (Constant a) where  
    fmap _ (Constant a) = Constant a
    fmap = undefined  

instance Monoid a  
    => Applicative (Constant a) where
    pure _ = Constant mempty
    pure = undefined

    Constant x <*> Constant y = Constant (x `mappend` y)
    (<*>) = undefined

# Exercise: Fixer upper  
Given the functions and values provided, use <$> from Functor
and <*> and pure from the Applicative type class to fill in missing
bits of the broken code below to make it work:  

1. const <$> Just "Hello" <*> "World" 

Answer:
`helloWorld = const <$> Just "Hello" <*> pure "World"`
> Output: Just "Hello"


2. (,,,) Just 90  
<*> Just 10 Just "Tierness" [1, 2, 3] 

Answer:
`test = (,,,) <$> Just 90 <*> Just 10 <*> Just "Tierness" <*> pure[1, 2, 3]`
> Output: Just (90,10,"Tierness",[1,2,3])

# List Applicative exercise
Implement Applicative for lists. Writing a minimally complete
Applicative instance calls for writing the definitions of both
pure and <*>. We’re going to provide a hint, as well. Use the
checkers library to validate your Applicative instance:
data List a =
Nil
| Cons a (List a)
deriving (Eq, Show)
Remember what you wrote for the list Functor:
instance Functor List where
fmap = undefined
Writing the list Applicative is similar:
instance Applicative List where
pure = undefined
(<*>) = undefined
Expected result:
Prelude> f = Cons (+1) (Cons (*2) Nil)
Prelude> v = Cons 1 (Cons 2 Nil)
Prelude> f <*> v
Cons 2 (Cons 3 (Cons 2 (Cons 4 Nil)))
CHAPTER 17. APPLICATIVE 1100
In case you get stuck, use the following functions and hints:
append :: List a -> List a -> List a
append Nil ys = ys
append (Cons x xs) ys =
Cons x $ xs `append` ys
fold :: (a -> b -> b) -> b -> List a -> b
fold _ b Nil = b
fold f b (Cons h t) = f h (fold f b t)
concat' :: List (List a) -> List a
concat' = fold append Nil
-- write this one in terms
-- of concat' and fmap
flatMap :: (a -> List b)
-> List a
-> List b
flatMap f as = undefined
Use the above, and also try using flatMap and fmap without
explicitly pattern matching on cons cells. You’ll still need to
handle the Nil cases.
flatMap is less strange than it would initially seem. It’s basically
“fmap, then smush”:
CHAPTER 17. APPLICATIVE 1101
Prelude> fmap (\x -> [x, 9]) [1, 2, 3]
[[1,9],[2,9],[3,9]]
Prelude> toMyList = foldr Cons Nil
Prelude> xs = toMyList [1, 2, 3]
Prelude> c = Cons
Prelude> f x = x `c` (9 `c` Nil)
Prelude> flatMap f xs
Cons 1 (Cons 9 (Cons 2
(Cons 9 (Cons 3 (Cons 9 Nil)))))
Applicative, unlike Functor, is not guaranteed to have a unique
implementation for a given datatype.
ZipList Applicative exercise
Implement the ZipList Applicative. Use the checkers library to
validate your Applicative instance. We’re going to provide the
EqProp instance and explain the weirdness in a moment:
newtype ZipList' a =
ZipList' [a]
deriving (Eq, Show)
CHAPTER 17. APPLICATIVE 1102
instance Eq a => EqProp (ZipList' a) where
xs =-= ys = xs' `eq` ys'
where xs' = let (ZipList' l) = xs
in take 3000 l
ys' = let (ZipList' l) = ys
in take 3000 l
instance Functor ZipList' where
fmap f (ZipList' xs) =
ZipList' $ fmap f xs
instance Applicative ZipList' where
pure = undefined
(<*>) = undefined
The idea is to align a list of functions with a list of values
and apply the first function to the first value and so on. The
instance should also work with infinite lists. Some examples:
Prelude> zl' = ZipList'
Prelude> z = zl' [(+9), (*2), (+8)]
Prelude> z' = zl' [1..3]
Prelude> z <*> z'
ZipList' [10,4,11]
Prelude> z' = pure 1
Prelude> z <*> z'
ZipList' [10,2,9]
CHAPTER 17. APPLICATIVE 1103
Prelude> z'' = zl' [1, 2]
Prelude> pure id <*> z''
ZipList' [1, 2]
Here, toMyList is whatever function you’ve written to convert
from the built-in list type to your handmade List type. Note
that the second z' is an infinite list. Check Prelude for functions
that can give you what you need. One starts with the letter z,
the other with the letter r. You’re meant to search for these
yourself. You’re looking for inspiration from these functions,
not to be able to directly reuse them, as you’re using a custom
List type, not the provided Prelude list type.
Explaining and justifying the weird EqProp The good news
is it’s EqProp that has the weird “check only the first 3,000
values” semantics instead of making the Eq instance weird.
The bad news is this is a byproduct of testing for equality
between infinite lists… that is, you can’t. If you use a typical
EqProp instance, the test for homomorphism in your Applicative
instance will chase the infinite lists forever. Since QuickCheck
is already an exercise in “good enough” validity checking, we
could choose to feel justified in this. If you don’t believe us,
try running the following in your REPL:
repeat 1 == repeat 1

17.9 Chapter exercises
Given a type that has an instance of Applicative, specialize the
types of the methods. Test your specialization in the REPL.
One way to do this is to bind aliases of the type class methods
to more concrete types that have the type we tell you to fill in:
CHAPTER 17. APPLICATIVE 1109
1. -- Type
[]
-- Methods
pure :: a -> ? a
(<*>) :: ? (a -> b) -> ? a -> ? b
2. -- Type
IO
-- Methods
pure :: a -> ? a
(<*>) :: ? (a -> b) -> ? a -> ? b
3. -- Type
(,) a
-- Methods
pure :: a -> ? a
(<*>) :: ? (a -> b) -> ? a -> ? b
CHAPTER 17. APPLICATIVE 1110
4. -- Type
(->) e
-- Methods
pure :: a -> ? a
(<*>) :: ? (a -> b) -> ? a -> ? b
Write instances for the following datatypes. Confused?
Write out what the types should be. Use the checkers library to
validate the instances:
1. data Pair a = Pair a a deriving Show
2. This should look familiar:
data Two a b = Two a b
3. data Three a b c = Three a b c
4. data Three' a b = Three' a b b
5. data Four a b c d = Four a b c d
6. data Four' a b = Four' a a a b
CHAPTER 17. APPLICATIVE 1111
Combinations
Remember the vowels and stops exercise from Chapter 10, on
folds? Write a function to generate all the possible combinations
of three input lists, using liftA3 from Control.Applicative:
import Control.Applicative (liftA3)
stops :: String
stops = "pbtdkg"
vowels :: String
vowels = "aeiou"
combos :: [a] -> [b] -> [c] -> [(a, b, c)]
combos = undefined