# Exercises: Apply yourself

Look at these pairs of functions. One function is unapplied, so the compiler will infer a maximally polymorphic type. The second function has been applied to a value, so the inferred type signature may have become concrete, or at least less polymorphic. Figure out how the type would change and why, make a note of what you think the new inferred type should be, and then check your work in GHCi.

1. Type signature of general function:
(++) :: [a] -> [a] -> [a]

How might that change when we apply it to the following
value?

myConcat x = x ++ " yo"
> myConcat :: [Char] -> [Char]  
> The type changes due to the compiler inferring a more concrete type signature as a result of the second function applied with a value.   
> Because the initial type signature of the first function was a polymorphic string, applying it to the second function with a [Char] type signature will result in the more concrete [Char]. 

2. General function:
(*) :: Num a => a -> a -> a  
Applied to a value:  
myMult x = (x / 3) * 5
> myMult :: Fractional a => a -> a
> myMult function inherits this Fractional type signature as a result of applying operator '/' (Fractional a) to the polymorphic operator * (Num a).

3. take :: Int -> [a] -> [a]  
myTake x = take x "hey you" 
> myTake :: Int -> [Char]
> myTake function has a Int -> [Char] signature as a result of applying take to myTake function.

4. (>) :: Ord a => a -> a -> Bool  
myCom x = x > (length [1..10])  
> myCom :: Int -> Bool
> Because myCom function was applied to the '>' (Eq a -> Ord a ) and length (t a -> Int).
> Hence myCom function argument is Int and outputs Boolean value.

5. (<) :: Ord a => a -> a -> Bool  
myAlph x = x < 'z'
> myAlph :: Char -> Bool
> Because myAlph function takes Char as an argument and '<' (Eq a -> Ord a) hence outputs Boolean value.
