# Chapter exercises

Welcome to another round of “Knowing is not enough; we
must apply.”  

Multiple choice  
1. A value of type [a] is:  
~~a) a list of alphabetic characters~~  
~~b) a list of lists~~  
**c) a list of elements that are all of some type a**  
~~d) a list of elements that are all of different types~~  

2. A function of type [[a]] -> [a] could:  
**a) take a list of strings as an argument**  
~~b) transform a character into a string~~  
~~c) transform a string into a list of strings~~  
~~d) take two arguments~~  

3. A function of type [a] -> Int -> a:  
~~a) takes one argument~~  
**b) returns one element of type a from a list**  
~~c) must return an Int value~~  
~~d) is completely fictional~~

4. A function of type (a, b) -> a:  
~~a) takes a list argument and returns a Char value~~  
~~b) has zero arguments~~  
**c) takes a tuple argument and returns the first value**  
~~d) requires that a and b have different types~~  

## Determine the type

For the following functions, determine the type of the specified value. We suggest you type them into a file, and load the contents of the file in GHCi. In all likelihood, it initially will not have the polymorphic types you might expect due to the monomorphism restriction. That means that top-level declarations by default will have a concrete type if any can be determined. You can fix this by setting up your file like so:

```hs
{-# LANGUAGE NoMonomorphismRestriction #-}
module DetermineTheType where
-- simple example
example = 1
```

**Note: If you do not include the NoMonomorphismRestriction extension, example would have the type Integer instead of Num a => a. Do your best to determine the most polymorphic type an expression could have in the following exercises.**


1. All function applications return a value. Determine the
values returned by these function applications and the types of those values:

    a) (* 9) 6  
    > Output: 54  
    > example :: Num a => a

    b) head [(0,"doge"),(1,"kitteh")] 
    > Output: (0,"doge")  
    > example :: Num a => (a, [Char])

    c) head [(0 :: Integer ,"doge"),(1,"kitteh")] 
    > Output: (0,"doge")  
    > example :: (Integer, [Char])

    d) if False then True else False 
    > Output: False  
    > example :: Bool

    e) length [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
    > Output: 5  
    > example :: Int

    f ) (length [1, 2, 3, 4]) > (length "TACOCAT")  
    > Output: False  
    > example :: Bool

2. Given:  
x = 5  
y = x + 5  
w = y * 10  

What is the type of w?  
> w :: Num a => a

3. Given:  
x = 5  
y = x + 5  
z y = y * 10  

What is the type of z? 
> z :: Num a => a -> a 

4. Given:  
x = 5  
y = x + 5  
f = 4 / y  

What is the type of f?  
> f :: Fractional a => a

5. Given:  
x = "Julie"  
y = " <3 "  
z = "Haskell"  
f = x ++ y ++ z  

What is the type of f? 
> f :: [Char]

## Does it compile?  

For each set of expressions, figure out which expression, if any, causes the compiler to squawk at you and why. Fix them if you can:  
1. bigNum = (^) 5 $ 10  
wahoo = bigNum $ 10  
    > Error: wahoo = bigNum $ 10  
    > Doesn't compile because bigNum is not a type-variable argument (aka It is a value not a function)   
    > Solution: 
    ```hs
    wahoo = bigNum * 10  
    ```

2. x = print  
y = print "woohoo!"  
z = x "hello world"
    > Compile success.  

3. a = (+)  
b = 5  
c = b 10  
d = c 200  
    > Doesn't compile because addOne function requires functions as arguments but 'b' and 'c' are just values.

4. a = 12 + b  
b = 10000 * c 
    > Doesn't compile because 'c' is not in scope. 

## Type variable or specific type constructor?  

1. You will be shown a type declaration, and you should categorize each type.  
The choices are: a fully polymorphic type variable, a constrained polymorphic type variable, or a concrete type constructor.  

<ins>EXAMPLE:</ins>  
f :: **Num** a => a -> b -> **Int** -> **Int**  
         -- [0]  [1]  [2]     [3]        [4]
Here, the answers would be: constrained polymorphic,
i.e. Num (0), fully polymorphic (1 and 2), and concrete (3 and 4).  

2. Categorize each component of this type signature as described in the previous example:  
    ```hs
    f :: zed -> Zed -> Blah  
        [0]     [1]    [2]
        > [0]: Fully polymorphic  
        > [1]: Concrete  
        > [2]: Concrete  
    ```

3. Categorize each component of this type signature:  
    ```hs
    f :: Enum b => a -> b -> C  
            [0]   [1]  [2]  [3]
        > [0]: Constrained polymorphic  
        > [1]: Fully polymorphic
        > [2]: Fully polymorphic
        > [3]: Concrete
    ```
4. Categorize each component of this type signature:  
    ```hs
    f :: f -> g -> C  
        [0]  [1]  [2]  
        > [0]: Fully polymorphic  
        > [1]: Fully polymorphic  
        > [2]: Concrete    
    ```
## Write a type signature
For the following expressions, please add a type signature. You should be able to rely on GHCi type inference to check your work, although you might not have precisely the same answer as GHCi gives (due to polymorphism, etc).

1. While we haven’t fully explained this syntax yet, you saw
it in Chapter 2 and as a solution to an exercise in Chapter 4. This syntax is a way of destructuring a single element
of a list by pattern matching:

    ```hs
    functionH :: [a] -> a 
    functionH (x:_) = x  
    ```

2. 

    ```hs
    functionC :: (Ord a) -> a -> a -> Bool 
    functionC x y =  
    if (x > y) then True else False  
    ```

3. 

    ```hs
    functionS :: (a , b) -> b 
    functionS (x, y) = y  
    ```

## Given a type, write the function  
You will be shown a type and a function that needs to be written.  
Use the information the type provides to determine what the
function should do. We’ll also tell you how many ways there are to write the function. Syntactically different but semantically equivalent implementations are not counted as being different.  
For example, writing a function one way and then rewriting the semantically identical function but using anonymous lambda syntax does not count as two implementations.  
To make things a little easier, we’ll demonstrate how to solve this kind of exercise:  

```hs
myFunc :: (x -> y)  
       -> (y -> z)  
       -> c  
       -> (a, x)  
       -> (a, z)  
myFunc xToY yToZ _ (a, x) = undefined  
```

Working through the above, we have a function that takes
four arguments. The final result is a tuple with the type (a,
z). It turns out, the c argument is nowhere in our result, and there’s nothing we need to do with it, so we use the underscore to ignore it.  
We name the two function arguments by their types and pattern match on the tuple argument.  
The only way to get the second value of the tuple from the type x to the type z is to use both of the functions furnished to us. If we try the following:  

```hs
myFunc xToY yToZ _ (a, x) =  
(a, (xToY x))  
```

We get a type error that the expected type is z but the actual type is y. That’s because we’re on the right path, but we’re not quite done yet! Accordingly, the following should type check:  

```hs
myFunc :: (x -> y)  
-> (y -> z)  
-> c  
-> (a, x)  
-> (a, z)  
myFunc xToY yToZ _ (a, x) =  
(a, (yToZ (xToY x)))  
```

1. There is only one function definition that type checks
and doesn’t go into an infinite loop when you run it:  
i :: a -> a  
i a = a  

2. There is only one version that works:  
c :: a -> b -> a  
c x y = x 

3. Given alpha equivalence, are the variables c'' and c (from
the previous exercise) the same thing?  
c'' :: b -> a -> b  
c'' x y = y  
> Yes, c'' and c are the same thing. 

4. Only one version works:  
c' :: a -> b -> b  
c' x y = y   

5. There are multiple possibilities, at least two of which
you’ve seen in previous chapters:  
r :: [a] -> [a]  
r = tail
r = reverse   

6. Only one version will type check:  
co :: (b -> c) -> (a -> b) -> a -> c  
co f u = f u   

7. One version will type check:  
a :: (a -> c) -> a -> a  
a f x  = x   

8. One version will type check:  
a' :: (a -> b) -> a -> b  
a' f x = f x   

## Fix it
Won’t someone take pity on this poor, broken code and fix it
up? Be sure to check carefully for things like **capitalization**, **parentheses**, and **indentation**:  

1. 

```hs  
module Sing where

fstString :: [Char] -> [Char]
fstString x = x ++ " in the rain"

sndString :: [Char] -> [Char]
sndString x = x ++ " over the rainbow"

sing = if (x > y) then fstString x else sndString y
    where x = "Singin"
        y = "Somewhere"  
```

2. Now that it’s fixed, make a minor change so that it sings
the other song. If you’re lucky, you’ll end up with both
songs stuck in your head!

```hs
module Sing where

fstString :: [Char] -> [Char]
fstString x = "I'm " ++ x ++ " in the rain"

sndString :: [Char] -> [Char]
sndString x = x ++ " over the rainbow"

sing = if (y > x) then fstString x else sndString y
     where x = "Singin"
           y = "Somewhere"
```

3.  
```hs
module Arith3Broken where

main :: IO()
main = do
    print (1 + 2)
    putStrLn "10"
    print (negate (-1))
    print ((+) 0 blah)
           where blah = negate 1
```

### Type-Kwon-Do
The name is courtesy of Phillip Wright. Thank you for the
idea!  

The focus here is on manipulating terms in order to get the
types to fit. This sort of exercise is something you’ll encounter in writing real Haskell code, so practicing will make it easier to deal with when you get there. Training in the subtle art of type-kwon-do will make you better at writing ordinary code, as well.  

We provide the types and bottomed out (declared as undefined)
terms. Bottom and undefined will be explained in more detail
later. The contents of the terms are irrelevant here. You’ll use only the declarations provided and what the Prelude provides by default unless otherwise specified. Your goal is to make the ???’d declaration pass the type checker by modifying it and it alone.  

Here’s an example of how we present these exercises and
how you are expected to solve them:  

```hs
data Woot  
data Blah  
f :: Woot -> Blah  
f = undefined  
g :: (Blah, Woot) -> (Blah, Blah)  
g = ???  
```

Above, it’s the **function g** that you’re supposed to implement; however, you can’t evaluate anything. You’re only allowed to use type checking and type inference to validate your answers. Also, note that we’re using a trick for defining
datatypes that can be named in a type signature but have no
values. Here’s an example of a valid solution:  

```hs
g :: (Blah, Woot) -> (Blah, Blah)  
g (b, w) = (b, f w)
```

The idea is to only fill in what we’ve marked with ???. Note:
not all terms will always be used in the intended solution to a problem!  

1. 

```hs
f :: Int -> String  
f = undefined -- f x = x  
g :: String -> Char  
g = undefined -- g f x = f x
h :: Int -> Char  
h = \x -> g (f x) OR h = \x -> g $ f x  
```

2. 

```hs
data A  
data B  
data C  
q :: A -> B  
q = undefined  -- q x = x
w :: B -> C  
w = undefined  -- w (q x) = q x
e :: A -> C 
e = \x -> (w (q x)) = w (q x) or e = \x -> w $ q x    
```

3.

```hs
data X  
data Y  
data Z  
xz :: X -> Z  
xz = undefined   
yz :: Y -> Z  
yz = undefined  
xform :: (X, Y) -> (Z, Z)  
xform = \(x, y) = (xz x, yz y)
```

4. 

```hs
munge :: (x -> y)  
      -> (y -> (w, z))  
      -> x  
      -> w  
munge = \f g x -> fst(g (f x))  
```