13.14 Chapter exercises
Hangman game logic
You may have noticed when you were playing with the hangman game, that there are some weird things about its game
logic:
• Although it can play with words up to nine characters
long, you only get to guess seven characters.
• It ends the game after seven guesses, whether they were
correct or incorrect.
• If your seventh guess supplies the last letter in the word,
it may still tell you that you lost.
• It picks some very strange words that you didn’t suspect
were even in the dictionary.
These make it unlike hangman as you might have played it
in the past. Ordinarily, only incorrect guesses count against
you, so you can make as many correct guesses as you need to
fill in the word. Modifying the game so that it either gives you
more guesses before the game ends or only uses shorter words
(or both) involves only a couple of uncomplicated steps.
A bit more complicated but worth attempting as an exercise
is changing the game so that, as with normal hangman, only
incorrect guesses count toward the guess limit.
CHAPTER 13. BUILDING PROJECTS 800
Modifying code
1. Ciphers: Open your ciphers module, and modify it so
that the Caesar and Vigenère ciphers work with user input.
2. Here is a very simple, short block of code. Notice it has
a forever that will make it keep running, over and over
again. Load it into your REPL, and test it out. Then, refer
back to the chapter, and modify it to exit successfully
after a False result:
import Control.Monad
palindrome :: IO ()
palindrome = forever $ do
line1 <- getLine
case (line1 == reverse line1) of
True -> putStrLn "It's a palindrome!"
False -> putStrLn "Nope!"
3. If you try using palindrome on a sentence such as “Madam
I’m Adam,” you may notice that it doesn’t work. Modifying the above so that it works on sentences, too, involves
several steps. You may need to refer back to previous
examples in the chapter to get ideas for proper ordering
and nesting. You may wish to import Data.Char to use the
function toLower. Have fun.
CHAPTER 13. BUILDING PROJECTS 801
4. type Name = String
type Age = Integer
data Person = Person Name Age deriving Show
data PersonInvalid =
NameEmpty
| AgeTooLow
| PersonInvalidUnknown String
deriving (Eq, Show)
mkPerson :: Name
-> Age
-> Either PersonInvalid Person
mkPerson name age
| name /= "" && age > 0 =
Right $ Person name age
| name == "" = Left NameEmpty
| not (age > 0) = Left AgeTooLow
| otherwise =
Left $ PersonInvalidUnknown $
"Name was: " ++ show name ++
" Age was: " ++ show age
Your job is to write the following function without modi-
CHAPTER 13. BUILDING PROJECTS 802
fying the code above:
gimmePerson :: IO ()
gimmePerson = undefined
Since IO () is about the least informative type imaginable,
we’ll tell you what it should do:
a) It should prompt the user for a name and age input.
b) It should attempt to construct a Person value using the
name and age the user enters. You’ll need the read
function for the age, because it’s an Integer rather
than a String.
c) If it constructs a successful person, it should print
"Yay! Successfully got a person: " followed by the Person
value.
d) If it gets an error value, it should report that an error
occurred and print the error.