Write map for BinaryTree
Given the definition of BinaryTree above, write a map function
for the data structure. You don’t really need to know anything
about binary trees to write these functions. The structure
inherent in the definition of the type is all you need. All you
need to do is write the recursive functions.
No special algorithms are needed, and we don’t expect
you to keep the tree balanced or ordered. Also, remember
that we’ve never once mutated anything. We’ve only built new
values from input data. Given that, when you go to implement
mapTree, you’re not changing an existing tree—you’re building
a new one based on an existing one (as when you are mapping
functions over lists).
CHAPTER 11. RULE THE TYPES, RULE THE WORLD 674
Note, you do not need to use insert' for this. Retain the
original structure of the tree:
mapTree :: (a -> b)
-> BinaryTree a
-> BinaryTree b
mapTree _ Leaf = Leaf
mapTree f (Node left a right) =
Node undefined undefined undefined
testTree' :: BinaryTree Integer
testTree' =
Node (Node Leaf 3 Leaf)
1
(Node Leaf 4 Leaf)
mapExpected =
Node (Node Leaf 4 Leaf)
2
(Node Leaf 5 Leaf)
-- acceptance test for mapTree
mapOkay =
if mapTree (+1) testTree' == mapExpected
then print "yup OK!"
else error "test failed!"
CHAPTER 11. RULE THE TYPES, RULE THE WORLD 675
Some hints for implementing mapTree follow.
The first pattern match in our mapTree function is the base
case, where we have a Leaf value. We can’t apply the f there,
because we don’t have an a, so we ignore it. Since we have
to return a value of type BinaryTree b whatever happens, we
return a Leaf value.
We return a Node in the second pattern match of our mapTree
function. Note that the Node data constructor takes three arguments:
Prelude> :t Node
Node :: BinaryTree a
-> a
-> BinaryTree a
-> BinaryTree a
So, you need to pass it more BinaryTree, a single value, and
more BinaryTree. You have the following terms available to
you:
1. f :: (a -> b)
2. left :: BinaryTree a
3. a :: a
4. right :: BinaryTree a
CHAPTER 11. RULE THE TYPES, RULE THE WORLD 676
5. mapTree :: (a -> b)
-> BinaryTree a
-> BinaryTree b
The Node returned needs to have a value of type b and
BinaryTree values with type a inside them. You have two functions at your disposal. One gets you (a -> b), the other maps
BinaryTrees of type a into BinaryTrees of type b. Get ’em tiger.
A few suggestions that might help you with this exercise:
1. Split out the patterns your function should match on first.
2. Implement the base case first.
3. Try manually writing out the steps of recursion first, then
collapse them into a single step that is recursive.
Convert binary trees to lists
Write functions to convert BinaryTree values to lists. Make
certain your implementation passes the tests:
preorder :: BinaryTree a -> [a]
preorder = undefined
inorder :: BinaryTree a -> [a]
inorder = undefined
CHAPTER 11. RULE THE TYPES, RULE THE WORLD 677
postorder :: BinaryTree a -> [a]
postorder = undefined
testTree :: BinaryTree Integer
testTree =
Node (Node Leaf 1 Leaf)
2
(Node Leaf 3 Leaf)
testPreorder :: IO ()
testPreorder =
if preorder testTree == [2, 1, 3]
then putStrLn "Preorder fine!"
else putStrLn "Bad news bears."
testInorder :: IO ()
testInorder =
if inorder testTree == [1, 2, 3]
then putStrLn "Inorder fine!"
else putStrLn "Bad news bears."
testPostorder :: IO ()
testPostorder =
if postorder testTree == [1, 3, 2]
then putStrLn "Postorder fine!"
else putStrLn "Bad news bears"
CHAPTER 11. RULE THE TYPES, RULE THE WORLD 678
main :: IO ()
main = do
testPreorder
testInorder
testPostorder
Write foldr for BinaryTree
Given the definition of BinaryTree we have provided, write a
catamorphism for binary trees:
-- any traversal order is fine
foldTree :: (a -> b -> b)
-> b
-> BinaryTree a
-> b