# Chapter exercises
Multiple choice
1. Given the following datatype:  
data Weekday =  
  Monday  
| Tuesday  
| Wednesday  
| Thursday  
| Friday  

    Which of the following is true?  
    **a) Weekday is a type with five data constructors.**  
    ~~b) Weekday is a tree with five branches.~~  
    ~~c) Weekday is a product type.~~  
    ~~d) Weekday takes five arguments.~~  

2. With the same datatype definition in mind, what is the type of the following function, f?  
f Friday = "Miller Time"  
~~a) f :: [Char]~~  
~~b) f :: String -> String~~  
**c) f :: Weekday -> String**  
~~d) f :: Day -> Beer~~    
3. Types defined with the data keyword:  
~~a) Must have at least one argument.~~  
~~b) Must begin with a capital letter.~~  
~~c) Must be polymorphic.~~  
**d) Cannot be imported from modules.**  

4. The function g xs = xs !! (length xs - 1):  
~~a) Is recursive and may not terminate.~~  
~~b) Returns the head of xs.~~  
**c) Returns the final element of xs.**  
~~d) Has the same type as xs.~~  
> (length xs - 1) refers to the last element.  

## Ciphers
In Chapter 9, on lists, you wrote a Caesar cipher. Now, we
want to expand on that idea by writing a Vigenère cipher.  

A Vigenère cipher is another substitution cipher, based on a Caesar cipher, but it uses a series of Caesar ciphers for polyalphabetic substitution.  

The substitution for each letter in the plain text is determined by a fixed keyword.  

So, for example, if you want to encode the message “meet
at dawn,” the first step is to pick a keyword that will determine which Caesar cipher to use. We’ll use the keyword “ALLY” here.  

You repeat the keyword for as many characters as there are in your original message:  

MEET AT DAWN  
ALLY AL LYAL  

The number of rightward shifts to make to encode each
character is set by the character of the keyword that lines up with it.  

The “A” means a shift of 0, so the initial M will remain
M. But the “L” for our second character sets a rightward shift of 11, so “E” becomes “P.” And so on, therefore “meet at dawn” encoded with the keyword “ALLY” becomes “MPPR AE OYWY.”  

Like the Caesar cipher, you can find all kinds of resources to help you understand this cipher, too, and also many examples written in Haskell. Consider using a combination of chr, ord, and mod again, possibly very similar to what you used for writing the original Caesar cipher.  

## As-patterns
As-patterns in Haskell are a nifty way to be able to pattern match on part of something and still refer to the entire original value.    
Some examples:  
f :: Show a => (a, b) -> IO (a, b)  
f t@(a, _) = do  
print a  
return t  

Here, we pattern match on a tuple so we can get at the first
value for printing, but use the @ symbol to introduce a binding named t in order to refer to the whole tuple rather than just a part:  

Prelude> f (1, 2)  
1  
(1,2)  

We can use as-patterns with pattern matching on arbitrary
data constructors, which includes lists:  
doubleUp :: [a] -> [a]  
doubleUp [] = []  
doubleUp xs@(x:_) = x : xs  
Prelude> doubleUp []  
[]  
Prelude> doubleUp [1]  
[1,1]  
Prelude> doubleUp [1, 2]  
[1,1,2]  
Prelude> doubleUp [1, 2, 3]  
[1,1,2,3]  

Use as-patterns to implement the following functions:  

1. This should return True if (and only if ) all the values in the first list appear in the second list, though they need not be contiguous:  
isSubseqOf :: (Eq a)  
=> [a]  
-> [a]  
-> Bool  
The following are examples of how this function should
work:  
Prelude> isSubseqOf "blah" "blahwoot"  
True  
Prelude> isSubseqOf "blah" "wootblah"  
True  
Prelude> isSubseqOf "blah" "wboloath"  
True  
Prelude> isSubseqOf "blah" "wootbla"  
False  
Prelude> isSubseqOf "blah" "halbwoot"  
False  
Prelude> isSubseqOf "blah" "blawhoot"  
True  
Remember that the sub-sequence has to be in the original
order!  

```hs
import Data.Char
 
isSubsequenceOf :: (Eq a) => [a] -> [a] -> Bool
isSubsequenceOf [] _ = True
isSubsequenceOf _ [] = False
isSubsequenceOf xs@(x:xt) (y:yt)
    | x == y    = isSubsequenceOf xt yt
    | otherwise = isSubsequenceOf xs yt
```

2. Split a sentence into words, then tuple each one with its
capitalized form:  
capitalizeWords :: String  
-> [(String, String)]  
Prelude> capitalizeWords "hello world"  
[("hello", "Hello"), ("world", "World")]  
```hs
capitalizeWords :: String -> [(String, String)]
capitalizeWords = map tuplise . words
    where tuplise cs@(c:ct) = (cs, toUpper c : ct)
```

## Language exercises  

1. Write a function that capitalizes a word:  
capitalizeWord :: String -> String  
capitalizeWord = undefined  
Example output:  
Prelude> capitalizeWord "Chortle"  
"Chortle"  
Prelude> capitalizeWord "chortle"  
"Chortle"  

```hs
capitalizeParagraph :: String -> String
capitalizeParagraph =
    unwords . addPeriod . joinSentence . sentenceCase . sentences
```

2. Write a function that capitalizes sentences in a paragraph.  
Recognize when a new sentence has begun by checking
for periods. Reuse the capitalizeWord function:  

capitalizeParagraph :: String -> String  
capitalizeParagraph = undefined  
Example result you should get from your function:  
Prelude> s = "blah. woot ha."  
Prelude> capitalizeParagraph s  
"Blah. Woot ha."  

```hs
sentences :: String -> [[String]]
sentences = map words . splitOn '.'
 
sentenceCase :: [[String]] -> [[String]]
sentenceCase = map capitalizeSentence
 
joinSentence :: [[String]] -> [String]
joinSentence = map unwords
 
addPeriod :: [String] -> [String]
addPeriod = map (append ".")
 
append :: [a] -> [a] -> [a]
append = flip (++)
 
capitalizeSentence :: [String] -> [String]
capitalizeSentence []     = []
capitalizeSentence (w:ws) = capitalizeWord w : ws
 
capitalizeWord :: String -> String
capitalizeWord []     = []
capitalizeWord (c:cs) = toUpper c : cs
 
-- re-use splitOn from Cha[pter 9                        
splitOn :: Char -> String -> [String]
splitOn x [] = []
splitOn x ws@(c:cs)
        | c == x   = splitOn x cs
        | otherwise = firstSplit : splitOn x unSplit
        where (firstSplit, unSplit) = break (== x) ws
 
isPeriod :: Char -> Bool
isPeriod = (== '.')
```

## Phone exercise

This exercise by Twitter user @geophf6 was originally for
1HaskellADay. Thank you for letting us use this exercise!
Remember old-fashioned phone inputs for writing text,
where you had to press a button multiple times to get different letters to come up? You may still have to do this when you try to search for a movie to watch using your television remote control.  

You’re going to write code to translate sequences of
button presses into strings and vice versa.

So! Here is the layout of the phone:


[https://twitter.com/geophf]
[https://twitter.com/1haskelladay]

```hs
-----------------------------------------
| 1      | 2 ABC | 3 DEF |
-----------------------------------------
| 4 GHI  | 5 JKL | 6 MNO |
-----------------------------------------
| 7 PQRS | 8 TUV | 9 WXYZ |
-----------------------------------------
| * ^    | 0 + _ | # ., |
-----------------------------------------
```

- The star (*) capitalizes the current letter, and 0 is your space bar. 

- To represent the digit itself, you press that digit once more than the letters it represents.  

- If you press a button one more than is required to type the digit, it wraps around to the first letter.  

For example:  
2 -> 'A'  
22 -> 'B'  
222 -> 'C'  
2222 -> '2'  
22222 -> 'A'  

So on and so forth. We’re going to kick this around.  

1. Create a data structure that captures the phone layout
above. The data structure should be able to express
enough of how the layout works that you can use it to
dictate the behavior of the functions in the following
exercises:  
-- fill in the rest  
data DaPhone = DaPhone  

```hs
data Key = Key {digit   :: Digit,
                letters :: String }
           deriving (Eq, Ord, Show)
 
data DaPhone = DaPhone [Key]
               deriving (Eq, Ord, Show)
```

2. Convert the following conversations into the key presses
required to express them. We’re going to suggest types
and functions to complete, in order to accomplish the
goal, but they’re not obligatory. If you want to do it
differently, go right ahead:  
convo :: [String]  
convo =  
["Wanna play 20 questions",  
"Ya",  
"U 1st haha",  
"Lol OK. Have u ever tasted alcohol",  
"Lol ya",  
"Wow ur cool haha. Ur turn",  
"OK. Do u think I am pretty Lol",  
"Lol ya",  
"Just making sure rofl ur turn"]  


-- validButtons = "1234567890*#"  
type Digit = Char  
-- Valid presses: 1 and up  
type Presses = Int  
reverseTaps :: DaPhone  
-> Char  
-> [(Digit, Presses)]  
reverseTaps = undefined  

-- assuming the default phone definition  
-- 'a' -> [('2', 1)]  
-- 'A' -> [('*', 1), ('2', 1)]  
cellPhonesDead :: DaPhone  
-> String  
-> [(Digit, Presses)]  
cellPhonesDead = undefined  

```hs
reverseTaps :: DaPhone -> Char -> [(Digit, Presses)]
reverseTaps p c | isUpper c = ('*', 1) : reverseTaps p (toLower c)
                | otherwise = [taps p c]
 
taps :: DaPhone -> Char -> (Digit, Presses)
taps p c = case elemIndex c cs of
             Just i  -> (key,  i + 1)
             Nothing -> error $ "taps - unknown character" ++ [c]
    where (Key key cs)  = charKey p c
 
charKey :: DaPhone -> Char -> Key
charKey (DaPhone keys) c = head digits
    where digits = filter (elem c . letters) keys

cellPhonesDead :: DaPhone -> String -> [(Digit, Presses)]
cellPhonesDead = concatMap . reverseTaps
```

3. How many times do digits need to be pressed for each
message?  
fingerTaps :: [(Digit, Presses)] -> Presses  
fingerTaps = undefined  

```hs
fingerTaps :: [(Digit, Presses)] -> Presses
fingerTaps = sum . map snd
```

4. What is the most popular letter for each message? What
was its cost? You’ll want to combine reverseTaps and fingerTaps to figure out what it costs in taps. reverseTaps is a list, because you need to press a different button in order to get capitals.  

mostPopularLetter :: String -> Char  
mostPopularLetter = undefined  

```hs
-- generic helper
mostPopular :: Ord a => [a] -> a
mostPopular = head . -- winner!
              maximumBy (comparing length) .  -- longest
              groupBy (==) .   -- same items together
              sort             -- order
 
mostPopularLetter = mostPopular
```

5. What is the most popular letter overall? What is the
overall most popular word?  
coolestLtr :: [String] -> Char  
coolestLtr = undefined  
coolestWord :: [String] -> String  
coolestWord = undefined  

```hs
coolestLtr :: [String] -> Char
coolestLtr = mostPopularLetter . concat
 
coolestWord :: [String] -> String
coolestWord  = mostPopular . concatMap words

coolestLtr' :: [String] -> Char
coolestLtr' = mostPopularLetter . filter (not . isSpace) . concat
```

## Hutton’s Razor  
Hutton’s Razor is a simple expression language that expresses integer literals and the addition of values. The “trick” to it is that it’s recursive, and the two expressions you’re summing together could be literals or themselves further addition operations.  

This sort of datatype is stereotypical of expression languages used to motivate ideas in research papers and functional pearls.  

Evaluating or folding a datatype is also in some sense what
you’re doing most of the time while programming anyway.
[http://www.cs.nott.ac.uk/~pszgmh/bib.html#semantics]


1. Your first task is to write the “eval” function that reduces an expression to a final sum:  
data Expr  
= Lit Integer  
| Add Expr Expr  
eval :: Expr -> Integer  
eval = error "do it to it"  

Example of expected output:  
Prelude> eval (Add (Lit 1) (Lit 9001))  
9002  

```hs
eval :: Expr -> Integer
eval (Lit x)   = x
eval (Add a b) = eval a + eval b
```

2. Write a printer for the expressions:  
printExpr :: Expr -> String  
printExpr = undefined  
Expected output:  
Prelude> printExpr (Add (Lit 1) (Lit 9001))  
"1 + 9001"  
Prelude> a1 = Add (Lit 9001) (Lit 1)  
Prelude> a2 = Add a1 (Lit 20001)  
Prelude> a3 = Add (Lit 1) a2  
Prelude> printExpr a3  
"1 + 9001 + 1 + 20001"  

```hs
printExpr :: Expr -> String
printExpr (Lit x)   = show x
printExpr (Add a b) = printExpr a ++ " + " ++ printExpr b
```