# Exercises: Pity the Bool
1. Given a datatype:  
data BigSmall =  
Big Bool  
| Small Bool  
deriving (Eq, Show)  
What is its cardinality? Hint: We already know Bool’s
cardinality. Show your work, as demonstrated earlier.  
> 4 since we have 2 values for Big and 2 values for Small

2. Given a datatype:  
-- bring Int8 in scope  
import Data.Int  
data NumberOrBool =  
Numba Int8  
| BoolyBool Bool  
deriving (Eq, Show)  

myNumba = Numba (-128)
What is the cardinality of NumberOrBool? What happens if
you try to create a Numba with a numeric literal larger than
127? And with a numeric literal smaller than -128?  
If you choose (-128) for a value precisely, you’ll notice
you get a spurious warning:  
Prelude> n = Numba (-129)  
Literal -129 is out of the  
Int8 range -128..127  
Now, since -128 is a perfectly valid Int8 value, you could
choose to ignore this.  
What happens is that (-128) desugars into (negate 128). The compiler sees that you expect the type Int8, but Int8’s max boundary is 127. So even though you’re negating 128, it hasn’t done that step yet and immediately whines about 128 being larger than 127.  
One way to avoid that warning is the following:  
Prelude> n = (-128)  
Prelude> x = Numba n  
Or you can use the NegativeLiterals extension as it recommends:  

Prelude> :set -XNegativeLiterals  
Prelude> n = Numba (-128)  
Note that the negative literals extension doesn’t prevent
the warning if you use negate directly.

> Cardinality: 258
> An exception is raised:  
warning: [-Woverflowed-literals]  
    Literal 128 is out of the Int8 range -128..127  
warning: [-Woverflowed-literals]  
    Literal -129 is out of the Int8 range -128..127  