Exercises: Dog types
Given the datatypes defined in the above sections:
1. Is Doggies a type constructor or a data constructor?
2. What is the kind of Doggies?
3. What is the kind of Doggies String?
4. What is the type of Husky 10?
5. What is the type of Husky (10 :: Integer)?
6. What is the type of Mastiff "Scooby Doo"?
7. Is DogueDeBordeaux a type constructor or a data constructor?
8. What is the type of DogueDeBordeaux?
9. What is the type of DogueDeBordeaux "doggie!"

Exercises: Vehicles
For these exercises, we’ll use the datatypes defined in the above
section. It would be good if you’ve typed them all into a source
file already, but if you haven’t, please do so now. You can then
define some sample data on your own, or use these to get you
started:
myCar = Car Mini (Price 14000)
urCar = Car Mazda (Price 20000)
clownCar = Car Tata (Price 7000)
doge = Plane PapuAir
1. What is the type of myCar?
2. Given the following, define the functions:
isCar :: Vehicle -> Bool
isCar = undefined
isPlane :: Vehicle -> Bool
isPlane = undefined
areCars :: [Vehicle] -> [Bool]
areCars = undefined
3. Now, we’re going to write a function to tell us the manufacturer of a piece of data:
getManu :: Vehicle -> Manufacturer
getManu = undefined
4. Given that we’re returning the Manufacturer, what will happen if you use this on Plane data?
5. All right. Let’s say you decide to add the size of the plane
as an argument to the Plane constructor. Add that to your
datatypes in the appropriate places, and change your data
and functions appropriately.

Exercises: Cardinality
While we haven’t explicitly described the rules for calculating
the cardinality of datatypes yet, you might already have an idea
of how to do it for simple datatypes with nullary constructors.
Try not to overthink these exercises—follow your intuition
based on what you know:
1. data PugType = PugData
2. For this one, recall that Bool is also defined with the |
symbol:
data Airline =
PapuAir
| CatapultsR'Us
| TakeYourChancesUnited
3. Given what we know about Int8, what’s the cardinality of
Int16?
4. Use the REPL and maxBound and minBound to examine Int
and Integer. What can you say about the cardinality of
those types?
5. Extra credit (impress your friends!): what’s the connection
between the 8 in Int8 and that type’s cardinality of 256?

Exercises: For example
1. You can query the type of a value in GHCi with the :type
command, also abbreviated :t.
Example:
Prelude> :t False
False :: Bool
What is the type of the data constructor MakeExample? What
happens when you request the type of Example?
2. What if you try :info on Example in GHCi? Can you determine what type class instances are defined for the Example
type using :info in GHCi?
3. Try making a new datatype like Example but with a single
type argument added to MakeExample, such as Int. What
has changed when you query MakeExample with :type in
GHCi?

Exercises: Logic goats
1. Reusing the TooMany type class, write an instance of the
type class for the type (Int, String). This will require
adding a language pragma named FlexibleInstances4
if
you do not use a newtype—GHC will tell you what to do.
2. Make another TooMany instance for (Int, Int). Sum the
values together under the assumption that this is a count
of goats from two fields.
3. Make another TooMany instance, this time for (Num a, TooMany
a) => (a, a). This can mean whatever you want, such as
summing the two numbers together.

Exercises: Pity the Bool
1. Given a datatype:
data BigSmall =
Big Bool
| Small Bool
deriving (Eq, Show)
What is its cardinality? Hint: We already know Bool’s
cardinality. Show your work, as demonstrated earlier.
2. Given a datatype:
-- bring Int8 in scope
import Data.Int
data NumberOrBool =
Numba Int8
| BoolyBool Bool
deriving (Eq, Show)
myNumba = Numba (-128)
What is the cardinality of NumberOrBool? What happens if
you try to create a Numba with a numeric literal larger than
127? And with a numeric literal smaller than -128?
If you choose (-128) for a value precisely, you’ll notice
you get a spurious warning:
Prelude> n = Numba (-129)
Literal -129 is out of the
Int8 range -128..127
Now, since -128 is a perfectly valid Int8 value, you could
choose to ignore this. What happens is that (-128) desugars into (negate 128). The compiler sees that you expect
the type Int8, but Int8’s max boundary is 127. So even
though you’re negating 128, it hasn’t done that step yet
and immediately whines about 128 being larger than 127.
One way to avoid that warning is the following:
Prelude> n = (-128)
Prelude> x = Numba n
Or you can use the NegativeLiterals extension as it recommends:
Prelude> :set -XNegativeLiterals
Prelude> n = Numba (-128)
Note that the negative literals extension doesn’t prevent
the warning if you use negate directly.
Exercises: How does your garden grow?
1. Given the type:
data FlowerType = Gardenia
| Daisy
| Rose
| Lilac
deriving Show
type Gardener = String
data Garden =
Garden Gardener FlowerType
deriving Show
What is the sum of products normal form of Garden?

Exercise: Programmers
Write a function that generates all possible values of Programmer.
Use the provided lists of inhabitants of OperatingSystem and
ProgLang:
allOperatingSystems :: [OperatingSystem]
allOperatingSystems =
[ GnuPlusLinux
, OpenBSDPlusNevermindJustBSDStill
, Mac
, Windows
]
allLanguages :: [ProgLang]
allLanguages =
[Haskell, Agda, Idris, PureScript]
allProgrammers :: [Programmer]
allProgrammers = undefined
Programmer is a product of two types. You can determine the
number of inhabitants of Programmer by calculating:
length allOperatingSystems
* length allLanguages
This is the essence of how product types and the number
of inhabitants relate.
There are several ways you could write a function to do
this, and some may produce a list that has duplicate values
in it. If your resulting list has duplicate values in it, you can
use nub from Data.List to remove duplicate values over your
allProgrammers value. Either way, if your result (minus any
duplicate values) equals the number returned by multiplying
those lengths together, you’ve probably got it figured out. Try
to be clever and make it work without manually typing out the
values.
Write map for BinaryTree
Given the definition of BinaryTree above, write a map function
for the data structure. You don’t really need to know anything
about binary trees to write these functions. The structure
inherent in the definition of the type is all you need. All you
need to do is write the recursive functions.
No special algorithms are needed, and we don’t expect
you to keep the tree balanced or ordered. Also, remember
that we’ve never once mutated anything. We’ve only built new
values from input data. Given that, when you go to implement
mapTree, you’re not changing an existing tree—you’re building
a new one based on an existing one (as when you are mapping
functions over lists).
CHAPTER 11. RULE THE TYPES, RULE THE WORLD 674
Note, you do not need to use insert' for this. Retain the
original structure of the tree:
mapTree :: (a -> b)
-> BinaryTree a
-> BinaryTree b
mapTree _ Leaf = Leaf
mapTree f (Node left a right) =
Node undefined undefined undefined
testTree' :: BinaryTree Integer
testTree' =
Node (Node Leaf 3 Leaf)
1
(Node Leaf 4 Leaf)
mapExpected =
Node (Node Leaf 4 Leaf)
2
(Node Leaf 5 Leaf)
-- acceptance test for mapTree
mapOkay =
if mapTree (+1) testTree' == mapExpected
then print "yup OK!"
else error "test failed!"
CHAPTER 11. RULE THE TYPES, RULE THE WORLD 675
Some hints for implementing mapTree follow.
The first pattern match in our mapTree function is the base
case, where we have a Leaf value. We can’t apply the f there,
because we don’t have an a, so we ignore it. Since we have
to return a value of type BinaryTree b whatever happens, we
return a Leaf value.
We return a Node in the second pattern match of our mapTree
function. Note that the Node data constructor takes three arguments:
Prelude> :t Node
Node :: BinaryTree a
-> a
-> BinaryTree a
-> BinaryTree a
So, you need to pass it more BinaryTree, a single value, and
more BinaryTree. You have the following terms available to
you:
1. f :: (a -> b)
2. left :: BinaryTree a
3. a :: a
4. right :: BinaryTree a
CHAPTER 11. RULE THE TYPES, RULE THE WORLD 676
5. mapTree :: (a -> b)
-> BinaryTree a
-> BinaryTree b
The Node returned needs to have a value of type b and
BinaryTree values with type a inside them. You have two functions at your disposal. One gets you (a -> b), the other maps
BinaryTrees of type a into BinaryTrees of type b. Get ’em tiger.
A few suggestions that might help you with this exercise:
1. Split out the patterns your function should match on first.
2. Implement the base case first.
3. Try manually writing out the steps of recursion first, then
collapse them into a single step that is recursive.
Convert binary trees to lists
Write functions to convert BinaryTree values to lists. Make
certain your implementation passes the tests:
preorder :: BinaryTree a -> [a]
preorder = undefined
inorder :: BinaryTree a -> [a]
inorder = undefined
CHAPTER 11. RULE THE TYPES, RULE THE WORLD 677
postorder :: BinaryTree a -> [a]
postorder = undefined
testTree :: BinaryTree Integer
testTree =
Node (Node Leaf 1 Leaf)
2
(Node Leaf 3 Leaf)
testPreorder :: IO ()
testPreorder =
if preorder testTree == [2, 1, 3]
then putStrLn "Preorder fine!"
else putStrLn "Bad news bears."
testInorder :: IO ()
testInorder =
if inorder testTree == [1, 2, 3]
then putStrLn "Inorder fine!"
else putStrLn "Bad news bears."
testPostorder :: IO ()
testPostorder =
if postorder testTree == [1, 3, 2]
then putStrLn "Postorder fine!"
else putStrLn "Bad news bears"
CHAPTER 11. RULE THE TYPES, RULE THE WORLD 678
main :: IO ()
main = do
testPreorder
testInorder
testPostorder
Write foldr for BinaryTree
Given the definition of BinaryTree we have provided, write a
catamorphism for binary trees:
-- any traversal order is fine
foldTree :: (a -> b -> b)
-> b
-> BinaryTree a
-> b
11.18 Chapter exercises
Multiple choice
1. Given the following datatype:
CHAPTER 11. RULE THE TYPES, RULE THE WORLD 679
data Weekday =
Monday
| Tuesday
| Wednesday
| Thursday
| Friday
Which of the following is true?
a) Weekday is a type with five data constructors.
b) Weekday is a tree with five branches.
c) Weekday is a product type.
d) Weekday takes five arguments.
2. With the same datatype definition in mind, what is the
type of the following function, f?
f Friday = "Miller Time"
a) f :: [Char]
b) f :: String -> String
c) f :: Weekday -> String
d) f :: Day -> Beer
3. Types defined with the data keyword:
CHAPTER 11. RULE THE TYPES, RULE THE WORLD 680
a) Must have at least one argument.
b) Must begin with a capital letter.
c) Must be polymorphic.
d) Cannot be imported from modules.
4. The function g xs = xs !! (length xs - 1):
a) Is recursive and may not terminate.
b) Returns the head of xs.
c) Returns the final element of xs.
d) Has the same type as xs.
Ciphers
In Chapter 9, on lists, you wrote a Caesar cipher. Now, we
want to expand on that idea by writing a Vigenère cipher. A Vigenère cipher is another substitution cipher, based on a Caesar
cipher, but it uses a series of Caesar ciphers for polyalphabetic
substitution. The substitution for each letter in the plain text
is determined by a fixed keyword.
So, for example, if you want to encode the message “meet
at dawn,” the first step is to pick a keyword that will determine
which Caesar cipher to use. We’ll use the keyword “ALLY” here.
You repeat the keyword for as many characters as there are in
your original message:
CHAPTER 11. RULE THE TYPES, RULE THE WORLD 681
MEET AT DAWN
ALLY AL LYAL
The number of rightward shifts to make to encode each
character is set by the character of the keyword that lines up
with it. The “A” means a shift of 0, so the initial M will remain
M. But the “L” for our second character sets a rightward shift
of 11, so “E” becomes “P.” And so on, therefore “meet at dawn”
encoded with the keyword “ALLY” becomes “MPPR AE OYWY.”
Like the Caesar cipher, you can find all kinds of resources to
help you understand this cipher, too, and also many examples
written in Haskell. Consider using a combination of chr, ord,
and mod again, possibly very similar to what you used for writing
the original Caesar cipher.
As-patterns
As-patterns in Haskell are a nifty way to be able to pattern match
on part of something and still refer to the entire original value.
Some examples:
f :: Show a => (a, b) -> IO (a, b)
f t@(a, _) = do
print a
return t
CHAPTER 11. RULE THE TYPES, RULE THE WORLD 682
Here, we pattern match on a tuple so we can get at the first
value for printing, but use the @ symbol to introduce a binding
named t in order to refer to the whole tuple rather than just a
part:
Prelude> f (1, 2)
1
(1,2)
We can use as-patterns with pattern matching on arbitrary
data constructors, which includes lists:
doubleUp :: [a] -> [a]
doubleUp [] = []
doubleUp xs@(x:_) = x : xs
Prelude> doubleUp []
[]
Prelude> doubleUp [1]
[1,1]
Prelude> doubleUp [1, 2]
[1,1,2]
Prelude> doubleUp [1, 2, 3]
[1,1,2,3]
Use as-patterns to implement the following functions:
CHAPTER 11. RULE THE TYPES, RULE THE WORLD 683
1. This should return True if (and only if ) all the values in
the first list appear in the second list, though they need
not be contiguous:
isSubseqOf :: (Eq a)
=> [a]
-> [a]
-> Bool
The following are examples of how this function should
work:
Prelude> isSubseqOf "blah" "blahwoot"
True
Prelude> isSubseqOf "blah" "wootblah"
True
Prelude> isSubseqOf "blah" "wboloath"
True
Prelude> isSubseqOf "blah" "wootbla"
False
Prelude> isSubseqOf "blah" "halbwoot"
False
Prelude> isSubseqOf "blah" "blawhoot"
True
Remember that the sub-sequence has to be in the original
order!
CHAPTER 11. RULE THE TYPES, RULE THE WORLD 684
2. Split a sentence into words, then tuple each one with its
capitalized form:
capitalizeWords :: String
-> [(String, String)]
Prelude> capitalizeWords "hello world"
[("hello", "Hello"), ("world", "World")]
Language exercises
1. Write a function that capitalizes a word:
capitalizeWord :: String -> String
capitalizeWord = undefined
Example output:
Prelude> capitalizeWord "Chortle"
"Chortle"
Prelude> capitalizeWord "chortle"
"Chortle"
2. Write a function that capitalizes sentences in a paragraph.
Recognize when a new sentence has begun by checking
for periods. Reuse the capitalizeWord function:
CHAPTER 11. RULE THE TYPES, RULE THE WORLD 685
capitalizeParagraph :: String -> String
capitalizeParagraph = undefined
Example result you should get from your function:
Prelude> s = "blah. woot ha."
Prelude> capitalizeParagraph s
"Blah. Woot ha."
Phone exercise
This exercise by Twitter user @geophf6 was originally for
1HaskellADay.7 Thank you for letting us use this exercise!
Remember old-fashioned phone inputs for writing text,
where you had to press a button multiple times to get different
letters to come up? You may still have to do this when you try
to search for a movie to watch using your television remote
control. You’re going to write code to translate sequences of
button presses into strings and vice versa.
So! Here is the layout of the phone:
6https://twitter.com/geophf
7https://twitter.com/1haskelladay
CHAPTER 11. RULE THE TYPES, RULE THE WORLD 686
-----------------------------------------
| 1 | 2 ABC | 3 DEF |
-----------------------------------------
| 4 GHI | 5 JKL | 6 MNO |
-----------------------------------------
| 7 PQRS | 8 TUV | 9 WXYZ |
-----------------------------------------
| * ^ | 0 + _ | # ., |
-----------------------------------------
The star (*) capitalizes the current letter, and 0 is your space
bar. To represent the digit itself, you press that digit once more
than the letters it represents. If you press a button one more
than is required to type the digit, it wraps around to the first
letter. For example:
2 -> 'A'
22 -> 'B'
222 -> 'C'
2222 -> '2'
22222 -> 'A'
So on and so forth. We’re going to kick this around.
1. Create a data structure that captures the phone layout
above. The data structure should be able to express
enough of how the layout works that you can use it to
CHAPTER 11. RULE THE TYPES, RULE THE WORLD 687
dictate the behavior of the functions in the following
exercises:
-- fill in the rest
data DaPhone = DaPhone
2. Convert the following conversations into the key presses
required to express them. We’re going to suggest types
and functions to complete, in order to accomplish the
goal, but they’re not obligatory. If you want to do it
differently, go right ahead:
convo :: [String]
convo =
["Wanna play 20 questions",
"Ya",
"U 1st haha",
"Lol OK. Have u ever tasted alcohol",
"Lol ya",
"Wow ur cool haha. Ur turn",
"OK. Do u think I am pretty Lol",
"Lol ya",
"Just making sure rofl ur turn"]
CHAPTER 11. RULE THE TYPES, RULE THE WORLD 688
-- validButtons = "1234567890*#"
type Digit = Char
-- Valid presses: 1 and up
type Presses = Int
reverseTaps :: DaPhone
-> Char
-> [(Digit, Presses)]
reverseTaps = undefined
-- assuming the default phone definition
-- 'a' -> [('2', 1)]
-- 'A' -> [('*', 1), ('2', 1)]
cellPhonesDead :: DaPhone
-> String
-> [(Digit, Presses)]
cellPhonesDead = undefined
3. How many times do digits need to be pressed for each
message?
fingerTaps :: [(Digit, Presses)] -> Presses
fingerTaps = undefined
4. What is the most popular letter for each message? What
was its cost? You’ll want to combine reverseTaps and fingerTaps
CHAPTER 11. RULE THE TYPES, RULE THE WORLD 689
to figure out what it costs in taps. reverseTaps is a list, because you need to press a different button in order to get
capitals.
mostPopularLetter :: String -> Char
mostPopularLetter = undefined
5. What is the most popular letter overall? What is the
overall most popular word?
coolestLtr :: [String] -> Char
coolestLtr = undefined
coolestWord :: [String] -> String
coolestWord = undefined
Hutton’s Razor
Hutton’s Razor8
is a simple expression language that expresses
integer literals and the addition of values. The “trick” to it is that
it’s recursive, and the two expressions you’re summing together
could be literals or themselves further addition operations.
This sort of datatype is stereotypical of expression languages
used to motivate ideas in research papers and functional pearls.
Evaluating or folding a datatype is also in some sense what
you’re doing most of the time while programming anyway.
8http://www.cs.nott.ac.uk/~pszgmh/bib.html#semantics
CHAPTER 11. RULE THE TYPES, RULE THE WORLD 690
1. Your first task is to write the “eval” function that reduces
an expression to a final sum:
data Expr
= Lit Integer
| Add Expr Expr
eval :: Expr -> Integer
eval = error "do it to it"
Example of expected output:
Prelude> eval (Add (Lit 1) (Lit 9001))
9002
2. Write a printer for the expressions:
printExpr :: Expr -> String
printExpr = undefined
Expected output:
Prelude> printExpr (Add (Lit 1) (Lit 9001))
"1 + 9001"
Prelude> a1 = Add (Lit 9001) (Lit 1)
Prelude> a2 = Add a1 (Lit 20001)
Prelude> a3 = Add (Lit 1) a2
CHAPTER 11. RULE THE TYPES, RULE THE WORLD 691
Prelude> printExpr a3
"1 + 9001 + 1 + 20001"
