# Exercises: Cardinality

**Cardinality refers to number of possible values**  

While we haven’t explicitly described the rules for calculating the cardinality of datatypes yet, you might already have an idea of how to do it for simple datatypes with nullary constructors.  
Try not to overthink these exercises—follow your intuition
based on what you know:  

1. data PugType = PugData  
> Cardinality: 1

2. For this one, recall that Bool is also defined with the |
symbol:  
data Airline =  
PapuAir  
| CatapultsR'Us  
| TakeYourChancesUnited
> Cardinality: 3  

3. Given what we know about Int8, what’s the cardinality of
Int16?  
> Cardinality: 65,536

4. Use the REPL and maxBound and minBound to examine Int
and Integer. What can you say about the cardinality of
those types?  

```hs
18,446,744,073,709,551,616
```

5. Extra credit (impress your friends!): what’s the connection between the 8 in Int8 and that type’s cardinality of 256?
> 2^8 = 256  

## Simple datatypes with nullary data constructors
We’ll start our exploration of cardinality by looking at datatypes with nullary data constructors:  
data Example = MakeExample deriving Show Example is our type constructor, and MakeExample is our only
data constructor. Since MakeExample takes no type arguments, it is a nullary constructor.  

We know that nullary data constructors are constants and represent only themselves as values.  

It is a single value whose only content is its name, not any other data.  
We can think of nullary constructors as representing one value, when we reason about the cardinality of the types they inhabit.  

All you can say about MakeExample is that the constructor is
the value MakeExample and that it inhabits the type Example.
There, the only inhabitant is MakeExample. Given that MakeExample is a single nullary value, the cardinality of the type Example is 1.  

This is useful, because it tells us that any time we see Example in the type signature of a function, we only have to reason about one possible value.  

### Exercises: For example
1. You can query the type of a value in GHCi with the :type
command, also abbreviated :t.  
Example:  

Prelude> :t False  
False :: Bool  
What is the type of the data constructor MakeExample? What
happens when you request the type of Example?  
> MakeExample :: Example. It’s an error to ask for the type of Example because it is a type constructor you can only ask its kind.

2. What if you try :info on Example in GHCi? Can you determine what type class instances are defined for the Example type using :info in GHCi?  
> MakeExample :: Int -> Example. GHCi gives the declaration at and also a Show instance.

3. Try making a new datatype like Example but with a single
type argument added to MakeExample, such as Int. What
has changed when you query MakeExample with :type in
GHCi?  
> Prelude> data Elephant = MakeElephant Int deriving Show  
Prelude> :t MakeElephant 3  
MakeElephant 3 :: Elephant  
Prelude> :i Elephant  
data Ghci3.Elephant = Elephant Int  
    -- Defined at :5:17  
 
data Elephant = MakeElephant Int    -- Defined at :7:1  
instance [safe] Show Elephant -- Defined at :7:43  
