16.17 Chapter exercises
Determine whether a valid Functor can be written for the datatype
provided:
1. data Bool =
False | True
2. data BoolAndSomethingElse a =
False' a | True' a
3. data BoolAndMaybeSomethingElse a =
Falsish | Truish a
4. Use the kinds to guide you on this one—don’t get too
hung up on the details:
newtype Mu f = InF { outF :: f (Mu f) }
5. Again, follow the kinds, and ignore the unfamiliar parts:
import GHC.Arr
data D =
D (Array Word Word) Int Int
Rearrange the arguments to the type constructor of the
datatype so the Functor instance works:
CHAPTER 16. FUNCTOR 1021
1. data Sum a b =
First a
| Second b
instance Functor (Sum e) where
fmap f (First a) = First (f a)
fmap f (Second b) = Second b
2. data Company a b c =
DeepBlue a c
| Something b
instance Functor (Company e e') where
fmap f (Something b) = Something (f b)
fmap _ (DeepBlue a c) = DeepBlue a c
3. data More a b =
L a b a
| R b a b
deriving (Eq, Show)
instance Functor (More x) where
fmap f (L a b a') = L (f a) b (f a')
fmap f (R b a b') = R b (f a) b'
CHAPTER 16. FUNCTOR 1022
Keeping in mind that it should result in a Functor that
does the following:
Prelude> fmap (+1) (L 1 2 3)
L 2 2 4
Prelude> fmap (+1) (R 1 2 3)
R 1 3 3
Write Functor instances for the following datatypes:
1. data Quant a b =
Finance
| Desk a
| Bloor b
2. No, it’s not interesting by itself:
data K a b =
K a
CHAPTER 16. FUNCTOR 1023
3. {-# LANGUAGE FlexibleInstances #-}
newtype Flip f a b =
Flip (f b a)
deriving (Eq, Show)
newtype K a b =
K a
-- This should remind you of an
-- instance you've written before
instance Functor (Flip K a) where
fmap = undefined
4. data EvilGoateeConst a b =
GoatyConst b
-- You thought you'd escaped the goats
-- by now didn't you? Nope.
No, it doesn’t do anything interesting. No magic here or
in the previous exercise. If it works, you succeeded.
5. Do you need something extra to make the instance work?
CHAPTER 16. FUNCTOR 1024
data LiftItOut f a =
LiftItOut (f a)
6. data Parappa f g a =
DaWrappa (f a) (g a)
7. Don’t ask for more type class instances than you need.
You can let GHC tell you what to do:
data IgnoreOne f g a b =
IgnoringSomething (f a) (g b)
8. data Notorious g o a t =
Notorious (g o) (g a) (g t)
9. You’ll need to use recursion:
data List a =
Nil
| Cons a (List a)
10. A tree of goats forms the Goat-Lord, a fearsome polycreature:
CHAPTER 16. FUNCTOR 1025
data GoatLord a =
NoGoat
| OneGoat a
| MoreGoats (GoatLord a)
(GoatLord a)
(GoatLord a)
-- A VERITABLE HYDRA OF GOATS
11. You’ll use an extra functor for this one, although your
solution might do it monomorphically without using fmap.
Keep in mind that you will probably not be able to validate
this one in the usual manner. Do your best to make it
work:2
data TalkToMe a =
Halt
| Print String a
| Read (String -> a)